Captioning sponsored by
PUBLIC AFFAIRS TELEVISION
Moyers: I'M BILL MOYERS.
WELCOME TO THIS SPECIAL EDITION
OF THE JOURNAL ON AIR AND ON
LINE.
FOUR YEARS AGO THE BUSH
ADMINISTRATION TOOK LEAVE OF
REALITY AND PLUNGED OUR COUNTRY
INTO A WAR SO POORLY PLANNED IT
SOON TURNED INTO A DISASTER.
THE STORY OF HOW HIGH OFFICIALS
MISLED THE COUNTRY HAS BEEN
TOLD, BUT THEY COULDN'T HAVE
DONE IT ON THEIR OWN.
THEY NEEDED A COMPLIANT PRESS,
TO PASS ON THEIR PROPAGANDA AS
NEWS AND CHEER THEM ON.
SINCE THEN THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE
HAVE DIED, AND MORE ARE DYING TO
THIS DAY.
YET THE STORY OF HOW THE MEDIA
BOUGHT WHAT THE WHITE HOUSE WAS
SELLING HAS NOT BEEN TOLD IN
DEPTH ON TELEVISION.
AS THE WAR RAGES INTO ITS FIFTH
YEAR, WE LOOK BACK AT THOSE
MONTHS LEADING UP TO THE
INVASION, WHEN OUR PRESS LARGELY
SURRENDERED ITS INDEPENDENCE AND
SKEPTICISM TO JOIN WITH OUR
GOVERNMENT IN MARCHING TO WAR.
OUR REPORT WAS PRODUCED AND
DIRECTED BY KATHLEEN HUGHES AND
EDITED BY ALISON AMRON.
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, THE
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.
GOOD EVENING, I'M PLEASED TO
TAKE YOUR QUESTIONS TONIGHT.
Moyers: TWO WEEKS BEFORE HE
WILL ORDER AMERICA TO WAR,
PRESIDENT BUSH CALLS A PRESS
CONFERENCE TO MAKE THE CASE FOR
DISARMING SADDAM HUSSEIN.
IRAQ IS A PART OF THE WAR ON
TERROR.
IT'S A COUNTRY THAT TRAINS
TERRORISTS, IT'S A COUNTRY THAT
CAN ARM TERRORISTS.
SADDAM HUSSEIN AND HIS WEAPONS
ARE A DIRECT THREAT TO THIS
COUNTRY.
Moyers: FOR MONTHS NOW, HIS
ADMINISTRATION HAS BEEN
DETERMINED TO LINK IRAQ TO 9/11.
SEPTEMBER 11 SHOULD SAY TO
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE THAT WE'RE
NOW A BATTLEFIELD.
Moyers: AT LEAST A DOZEN
TIMES DURING THIS PRESS
CONFERENCE, HE WILL INVOKE 9/11
AND AL QAEDA TO JUSTIFY A
PREEMPTIVE ATTACK ON A COUNTRY
THAT HAS NOT ATTACKED AMERICA.
MR. PRESIDENT, IF YOU
DECIDE...
Moyers: BUT THE WHITE HOUSE
PRESS CORPS WILL ASK NO HARD
QUESTIONS TONIGHT ABOUT THOSE
CLAIMS.
LISTEN TO WHAT THE PRESIDENT
SAYS.
THIS IS A SCRIPTED...
( LAUGHS )
THANK YOU MR. PRESIDENT...
Moyers: "SCRIPTED."
SURE ENOUGH, THE PRESIDENT'S
STAFF HAS GIVEN HIM A LIST OF
REPORTERS TO CALL ON.
LET'S SEE HERE.
ELIZABETH?
GREGORY?
APRIL?
DID YOU HAVE A QUESTION OR DID I
CALL UPON YOU COLD?
NO, I HAVE A QUESTION.
( LAUGHTER )
OKAY.
I'M SURE YOU DO HAVE A QUESTION.
HE SORT OF GIGGLED AND
LAUGHED, AND THE REPORTERS SORT
OF LAUGHED.
AND I DON'T KNOW IF IT WAS OUT
OF EMBARRASSMENT FOR HIM OR
EMBARRASSMENT FOR THEM, BECAUSE
THEY STILL CONTINUED TO PLAY
ALONG.
AFTER HIS QUESTION WAS DONE,
THEY ALL SHOT UP THEIR HANDS AND
PRETENDED THEY HAD A CHANCE OF
BEING CALLED ON.
HOW IS YOUR FAITH GUIDING
YOU?
MY FAITH SUSTAINS ME BECAUSE
I PRAY DAILY.
I PRAY FOR GUIDANCE.
I THINK IT JUST CRYSTALLIZED
WHAT WAS WRONG WITH THE PRESS
COVERAGE DURING THE RUN-UP TO
WAR.
I THINK THEY FELT LIKE THE WAR
WAS GOING TO HAPPEN.
AND THEY... THE BEST THING FOR
THEM TO DO WAS TO GET OUT OF THE
WAY.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR QUESTIONS.
Moyers: OUR STORY BEGINS WITH
THE HORROR OF 9/11.
OH, MY GOD.
THAT LOOKS LIKE A SECOND
PLANE.
Moyers: LIKE EVERYONE ELSE,
JOURNALISTS WERE STUNNED BY THE
DEATH AND DEVASTATION.
THIS IS AS CLOSE AS WE CAN
GET TO THE BASE OF THE WORLD
TRADE CENTER.
YOU CAN SEE THE FIREMEN
ASSEMBLED HERE.
THE POLICE OFFICERS, F.B.I.
AGENTS.
AND YOU CAN SEE THE TWO TOWERS,
A HUGE EXPLOSION NOW RAINING
DEBRIS ON ALL OF US.
WE BETTER GET OUT OF THE WAY.
AND THERE, AS YOU CAN SEE,
PERHAPS THE SECOND TOWER, THE
FRONT TOWER, THE TOP PORTION OF
WHICH IS COLLAPSING.
GOOD LORD.
IF THERE IS A WAR, IT'S A WAR
AGAINST TERRORISM THAT
STARTED... RATHER ONGOING RIGHT
NOW, IT STARTED HERE AT ABOUT
QUARTER TO 9:00 THIS MORNING.
THERE ARE NO WORDS THAT CAN
DESCRIBE THIS.
I WAS DEEPLY MOVED BY 9/11.
I DON'T KNOW OF ANY AMERICAN WHO
WASN'T.
I THINK WE ALL BOUGHT INTO THAT
THE WORLD HAD CHANGED.
I THINK THE ATMOSPHERE IN THE
UNITED STATES AFTER SEPTEMBER 11
WAS SO OVERWHELMINGLY PATRIOTIC,
AND OVERWHELMINGLY: "WE MUST DO
SOMETHING ABOUT THIS."
AND THE PEOPLE WHO KNOCKED
THESE BUILDINGS DOWN WILL HEAR
ALL OF US SOON.
( CHEERS AND APPLAUSE )
U.S.A.!
GEORGE BUSH IS THE PRESIDENT.
HE MAKES THE DECISIONS, AND, YOU
KNOW, AS JUST ONE AMERICAN
WHEREVER HE WANTS ME TO LINE UP,
JUST TELL ME WHERE.
I DIDN'T MEAN IT IN A
JOURNALISTIC SENSE.
I KNOW IT MAY HAVE COME ACROSS
THAT WAY.
I MEANT IT IN A SENSE AS AN
INDIVIDUAL CITIZEN.
"MR. PRESIDENT, IF YOU NEED ME,
IF YOU NEED ME TO GO TO HELL AND
BACK FOR MY COUNTRY, I WILL DO
IT. "
BUT I'LL TELL YOU THIS, IF THEY
COULD GO DOWN TO GROUND ZERO
HERE IN LOWER MANHATTAN-- AND
YOU REFERRED TO IT EARLIER-- AND
SEE THE FOLLOWING, SEE THOSE
FIREMAN...
GO TO BREAK.
OKAY, I'LL TELL YOU WHAT.
I CAN FINISH IT.
NO, NO.
DAN, TAKE CARE OF YOURSELF.
WE'LL BE RIGHT BACK HERE WITH
DAN RATHER.
( APPLAUSE )
Moyers: WHAT I WAS WRESTLING
WITH THAT NIGHT LISTENING TO YOU
IS ONCE WE LET OUR EMOTIONS OUT
AS JOURNALISTS ON THE AIR, ONCE
WE SAY WE'LL LINE UP WITH THE
PRESIDENT, CAN WE EVER REALLY
SAY TO THE COUNTRY THE
PRESIDENT'S OUT OF LINE?
YES, OF COURSE YOU CAN.
OF COURSE YOU CAN.
NO JOURNALIST SHOULD TRY TO BE A
ROBOT AND SAY, "THEY'VE ATTACKED
MY COUNTRY, THEY'VE KILLED
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE, BUT I DON'T
FEEL IT."
BUT WHAT YOU CAN DO, AND WHAT
SHOULD HAVE BEEN DONE IN THE
WAKE OF THAT, IS SUCK IT UP AND
SAY, "OKAY, THAT'S THE WAY I
FEEL.
THAT'S THE WAY I FEEL AS A
CITIZEN.
BY BEING THE BEST JOURNALIST IT
CAN BE.
THAT'S THE WAY I CAN BE
PATRIOTIC."
BY THE WAY, BILL, THIS IS NOT AN
EXCUSE.
I DON'T THINK THERE IS ANY
EXCUSE FOR, YOU KNOW, MY
PERFORMANCE AND THE PERFORMANCE
OF THE PRESS, IN GENERAL, IN THE
ROLL UP TO THE WAR.
THERE WERE EXCEPTIONS.
THERE WERE SOME PEOPLE WHO I
THINK DID A BETTER JOB THAN
OTHERS.
BUT OVERALL, AND IN THE MAIN,
THERE'S NO QUESTION THAT WE
DIDN'T DO A GOOD JOB.
Moyers: AS AMERICANS REACTED
TO THE ATROCITIES OF A SNEAK
ATTACK, A POWERFUL SURGE OF
SOLIDARITY SWEPT ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT SEEMS
TO BE BINDING ALL AMERICANS
THESE DAYS, NO MATTER THEIR
BACKGROUNDS, IN THE AFTERMATH OF
THIS TRAGEDY IS A RENEWED SENSE
OF PATRIOTISM.
TO SEE SO MANY REPORTERS JUST
WEARING A LITTLE AMERICAN FLAG
ON THE LAPELS, TO SEE TIM
RUSSERT ON "MEET THE PRESS..."
YEAH.
...WITH THE RED, WHITE AND
BLUE RIBBONS.
I THINK IT'S A HUMAN EMOTION
THERE.
Moyers: AND AS THE
ADMINISTRATION ORGANIZED TO
STRIKE BACK AT THE TERRORISTS,
THERE WAS LITTLE TOLERANCE FOR
CRITICAL SCRUTINY FROM
JOURNALISTS.
THERE WAS A PATRIOTIC FERVOR,
AND THE ADMINISTRATION USED IT.
SO THAT IF YOU CHALLENGED
ANYTHING, YOU WERE MADE TO FEEL
THAT THERE WAS SOMETHING WRONG
WITH THAT.
Moyers: WALTER ISAACSON WAS
THEN CHAIRMAN AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF CNN.
AND THERE WAS EVEN ALMOST A
PATRIOTISM POLICE WHICH, YOU
KNOW, THEY'D BE UP THERE ON THE
INTERNET SORT OF PICKING
ANYTHING A CHRISTIANE AMANPOUR
OR SOMEBODY ELSE WOULD SAY AS IF
IT WERE DISLOYAL.
Moyers: WE INTERVIEWED A
FORMER REPORTER AT CNN WHO HAD
BEEN THERE THROUGH THAT PERIOD.
AND THIS REPORTER SAID THIS
QUOTE: "EVERYBODY ON STAFF JUST
SORT OF KNEW NOT TO PUSH TOO
HARD TO DO STORIES CRITICAL OF
THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION."
ESPECIALLY RIGHT AFTER 9/11,
ESPECIALLY WHEN THE WAR IN
AFGHANISTAN IS GOING ON, THERE
WAS A REAL SENSE THAT YOU DON'T
GET THAT CRITICAL OF A
GOVERNMENT THAT'S LEADING US IN
WARTIME.
MOVE OUT!
Moyers: WHEN AMERICAN FORCES
WENT AFTER THE TERRORIST BASES
IN AFGHANISTAN, NETWORK AND
CABLE NEWS REPORTED THE CIVILIAN
CASUALTIES.
THE PATRIOT POLICE CAME
KNOCKING.
WE'D PUT IT ON THE AIR, AND
BY NATURE OF A 24-HOUR TV
NETWORK, IT WAS REPLAYING OVER
AND OVER AGAIN.
SO, YOU WOULD GET PHONE CALLS.
YOU WOULD GET ADVERTISERS.
YOU WOULD GET THE
ADMINISTRATION.
Moyers: YOU SAID PRESSURE
FROM ADVERTISERS?
NOT DIRECT PRESSURE FROM
ADVERTISERS, BUT BIG PEOPLE IN
CORPORATIONS WERE CALLING UP AND
SAYING, "YOU'RE BEING ANTI-
AMERICAN HERE."
Moyers: SO ISAACSON SENT HIS
STAFF A MEMO LEAKED TO THE
"WASHINGTON POST."
"IT SEEMS PERVERSE," HE SAID,
"TO FOCUS TOO MUCH ON THE
CASUALTIES OR HARDSHIP IN
AFGHANISTAN."
THERE'S A BODY UP HERE.
Moyers: AND HE ORDERED HIS
REPORTERS AND ANCHORS TO BALANCE
THE IMAGES OF CIVILIAN
DEVASTATION WITH REMINDERS OF
SEPTEMBER 11.
I FELT IF WE PUT INTO
CONTEXT, WE COULD ALLEVIATE THE
PRESSURE OF PEOPLE SAYING,
"DON'T EVEN SHOW WHAT'S
HAPPENING IN AFGHANISTAN."
Moyers: NEWSPAPERS WERE
SQUEEZED, TOO.
THIS ONE IN FLORIDA TOLD ITS
EDITORS: "DO NOT USE PHOTOS ON
PAGE 1A SHOWING CIVILIAN
CASUALTIES.
OUR SISTER PAPER HAS DONE SO AND
RECEIVED HUNDREDS AND HUNDREDS
OF THREATENING E-MAILS."
AND THEN THERE WAS FOX NEWS,
WHOSE CHIEF EXECUTIVE, THE
VETERAN REPUBLICAN OPERATIVE AND
MEDIA STRATEGIST ROGER AILES,
HAD PRIVATELY URGED THE WHITE
HOUSE TO USE THE HARSHEST
MEASURES POSSIBLE AFTER 9/11.
SO WE WERE CAUGHT BETWEEN
THIS PATRIOTIC FERVOR AND A
COMPETITOR WHO WAS USING THAT TO
THEIR ADVANTAGE.
THEY WERE PUSHING THE FACT THAT
CNN WAS TOO LIBERAL, THAT WE
WERE SORT OF VAGUELY ANTI-
AMERICAN.
Moyers: EVEN AS AMERICAN
TROOPS WERE STILL CHASING OSAMA
BIN LADEN THROUGH THE MOUNTAINS
OF AFGHANISTAN, WASHINGTON WAS
MOVING TOWARD A WIDER WAR.
WITHIN HOURS AFTER THE ATTACKS
ON 9/11, DEFENSE SECRETARY
RUMSFELD PUT SADDAM HUSSEIN ON
THE HIT LIST.
AN AIDE TOOK NOTES.
I KNEW BEFORE 9/11 THAT MANY
OF THE PEOPLE WHO CAME INTO THE
ADMINISTRATION WERE COMMITTED TO
TOPPLING SADDAM HUSSEIN, AND
DOING IT WITH MILITARY FORCE IF
NECESSARY.
Moyers: DAN RATHER IS TALKING
ABOUT PROMINENT WASHINGTON
FIGURES IN AND OUTSIDE OF
GOVERNMENT KNOWN AS
NEOCONSERVATIVES.
THEY HAD LONG WANTED TO
TRANSFORM THE MIDDLE EAST,
BEGINNING WITH THE REMOVAL OF
SADDAM HUSSEIN.
THE TERRORIST ATTACKS GAVE THEM
THE CHANCE THEY WANTED, AND THE
MEDIA GAVE THEM A PLATFORM.
RICHARD PERLE, NEXT PHASE:
SADDAM HUSSEIN?
ABSOLUTELY.
ONE PERSON CLOSE TO THE
DEBATE SAID TO ME THIS WEEK THAT
IT'S NO LONGER A QUESTION OF
"IF," IT'S A QUESTION OF "HOW"
WE GO AFTER SADDAM HUSSEIN.
Moyers: IN THE WEEKS AFTER
9/11, THEY SEEMED TO BE ON EVERY
CHANNEL, GUNNING FOR HUSSEIN.
YOU ARE PROBABLY THE HAWKIEST
OF THE HAWKS ON THIS.
WHY?
WELL, I DON'T KNOW THAT I
ACCEPT THAT CHARACTERIZATION,
BUT IT'S PROBABLY NOT TOO FAR
OFF.
I THINK THAT THE BAGHDAD REGIME
IS A SERIOUS DANGER TO WORLD
PEACE.
WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
IN THE HANDS OF SADDAM HUSSEIN,
PLUS HIS KNOWN CONTACT WITH
TERRORISTS, INCLUDING AL QAEDA
TERRORISTS, IS SIMPLY A THREAT
TOO LARGE TO CONTINUE TO
TOLERATE.
Moyers: AMONG THEIR LEADING
SPOKESMEN WERE RICHARD PERLE AND
JAMES WOOLSEY.
BOTH SAT ON THE DEFENSE POLICY
BOARD ADVISING DONALD RUMSFELD.
AND THEY USED THEIR INSIDE
STATUS TO ASSURE THE PRESS THAT
OVERTHROWING HUSSEIN WOULD BE
EASY.
WE WOULD BE SEEN AS
LIBERATORS IN IRAQ.
Moyers: MAJOR NEWSPAPERS AND
MAGAZINES GAVE THEM PRIME SPACE
TO MAKE THEIR CASE, INCLUDING
THE POSSIBILITY THAT 9/11 HAD
BEEN "SPONSORED, SUPPORTED AND
PERHAPS EVEN ORDERED BY SADDAM
HUSSEIN."
THE PRESIDENT, THEY SAID, SHOULD
TAKE PREEMPTIVE ACTION.
THE BIGGEST MISTAKE WE HAVE
MADE-- IT'S OUR MISTAKE, IT'S
NOT THE MISTAKE OF THE ARABS--
WAS NOT FINISHING OFF SADDAM
HUSSEIN IN 1991.
Moyers: NO ONE GOT MORE AIR
TIME FROM AN ARMCHAIR THAN BILL
KRISTOL, EDITOR OF THE "WEEKLY
STANDARD" AND A MEDIA-SAVVY
REPUBLICAN STRATEGIST.
IN THE 1990s, KRISTOL ORGANIZED
A CAMPAIGN FOR INCREASED
MILITARY SPENDING AND A MUSCULAR
FOREIGN POLICY.
IN 1998, HE AND HIS ALLIES WROTE
PRESIDENT BILL CLINTON URGING
HIM TO REMOVE SADDAM HUSSEIN
FROM POWER.
AND NOW, JUST DAYS AFTER 9/11,
WITH MANY OF THEIR ALLIES
SERVING IN THE ADMINISTRATION,
THEY WROTE AN OPEN LETTER TO
PRESIDENT BUSH, CALLING FOR
REGIME CHANGE IN BAGHDAD.
OVER THE COMING MONTHS,
KRISTOL'S "WEEKLY STANDARD" KEPT
UP THE DRUMBEAT.
WHAT ARE THE CONSEQUENCES IF
THE U.S. DOES NOT FINISH OFF
THIS SADDAM HUSSEIN AS A SECOND
STEP IN THE WAR ON TERRORISM?
IT WOULD MEAN THAT THE
PRESIDENT, HAVING DECLARED A
GLOBAL WAR ON TERRORISM, DIDN'T
FOLLOW THROUGH, DIDN'T TAKE OUT
THE MOST THREATENING TERRORIST
STATE IN THE WORLD.
Moyers: THE EDITORIAL PAGE OF
THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL" SIGNED
ON, AND SO DID HIGH-PROFILE
PUNDITS LIKE THE "NEW YORK
TIMES'" WILLIAM SAFIRE.
SAFIRE, WILL YOU WAGER MS.
WRIGHT RIGHT NOW THAT SADDAM
WILL BE OUT OF POWER BY THE END
OF 2002?
ABSOLUTELY.
I'LL SEE YOU HERE A YEAR FROM
NOW.
IF YOU GO AFTER IRAQ YOU'RE
GOING TO LOSE A LOT OF ALLIES,
BUT WHO CARES?
Moyers: CHARLES KRAUTHAMMER
AND OTHER TOP COLUMNISTS AT THE
"WASHINGTON POST" ALSO SAW THE
HAND OF SADDAM HUSSEIN IN THE
TERRORIST ATTACKS.
JIM HOAGLAND IMPLICATED HUSSEIN
WITHIN HOURS AFTER THE SUICIDE
BOMBERS STRUCK ON 9/11.
AND THE "POST'S" GEORGE WILL
FIRED AWAY ON THE TALK SHOWS.
THE ADMINISTRATION KNOWS HE'S
VOWED... HUSSEIN HAS VOWED
REVENGE, HE HAS ANTHRAX, HE
LOVES BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS, HE HAS
TERRORIST TRAINING CAMPS,
INCLUDING A 707 TO PRACTICE ON.
Moyers: IT WAS PROVING
DIFFICULT TO DISTINGUISH THE
OPINION OF THE PUNDITS FROM THE
POLICIES OF THE ADMINISTRATION.
BUT AS THE HULLABALOO OVER
SADDAM GREW IN WASHINGTON, BOB
SIMON OF CBS NEWS' "60 MINUTES"
WAS DUMBFOUNDED.
HE'S BASED IN THE MIDDLE EAST.
FROM OVERSEAS WE HAD A
CLEARER VIEW.
I MEAN, WE KNEW THINGS OR
SUSPECTED THINGS THAT PERHAPS
THE WASHINGTON PRESS CORPS COULD
NOT SUSPECT.
FOR EXAMPLE, THE ABSURDITY OF
PUTTING UP A CONNECTION BETWEEN
SADDAM HUSSEIN AND AL QAEDA.
Moyers: ABSURDITY.
THE WASHINGTON PRESS CORPS
CANNOT QUESTION AN ABSURDITY?
WELL, MAYBE THE WASHINGTON
PRESS CORPS, BASED INSIDE THE
BELT, WASN'T AS AWARE AS THOSE
OF US WHO ARE BASED IN THE
MIDDLE EAST AND WHO SPEND A LOT
OF TIME IN IRAQ.
I MEAN, WHEN THE WASHINGTON
PRESS CORPS TRAVELS, IT TRAVELS
WITH THE PRESIDENT OR WITH THE
SECRETARY OF STATE AND...
Moyers: IN A BUBBLE.
YEAH, IN A BUBBLE.
WHEREAS WE WHO'VE SPENT WEEKS
JUST WALKING THE STREETS OF
BAGHDAD, AND IN OTHER SITUATIONS
IN BAGHDAD, JUST WERE SCRATCHING
OUR HEADS IN WAYS THAT PERHAPS
THAT THE WASHINGTON PRESS CORPS
COULD NOT.
Moyers: SIMON WAS UNDER NO
ILLUSIONS ABOUT SADDAM HUSSEIN.
DURING THE FIRST GULF WAR, HE
AND HIS CAMERA CREW WERE
ARRESTED BY IRAQI FORCES AND
BRUTALIZED FOR 40 DAYS BEFORE
BEING RELEASED.
WE'RE GOING HOME, WHICH IS
THE PLACE YOU GO TO AFTER A WAR
WHEN... IF YOU'VE BEEN AS LUCKY
AS WE'VE BEEN.
Moyers: IT DIDN'T MAKE SENSE
TO SIMON THAT THE DICTATOR WOULD
TRUST ISLAMIC TERRORISTS.
SADDAM, AS MOST TYRANTS, WAS
A TOTAL CONTROL FREAK.
HE WANTED TOTAL CONTROL OF HIS
REGIME, TOTAL CONTROL OF THE
COUNTRY.
AND TO INTRODUCE A WILD CARD
LIKE AL QAEDA IN ANY SENSE WAS
JUST SOMETHING HE WOULD NOT DO.
SO I JUST DIDN'T BELIEVE IT FOR
AN INSTANT.
AND SOME OF THE THINGS THAT
WERE SAID, MANY OF THE THINGS
THAT WERE SAID ABOUT IRAQ,
DIDN'T MAKE SENSE.
AND THAT REALLY PROMPTS YOU TO
ASK, "WAIT A MINUTE, IS THIS
TRUE?
DOES EVERYONE AGREE THAT THIS IS
DOES ANYONE THINK THIS IS NOT
TRUE?"
THIS IS WHAT WE'RE GOING TO DO,
THIS IS PLAN-A NOW.
Moyers: JOHN WALCOTT WASN'T
BUYING THE OFFICIAL LINE,
EITHER.
THE BUREAU CHIEF OF KNIGHT
RIDDER NEWS SERVICE, HE AND HIS
REPORTERS COVERED WASHINGTON FOR
32 NEWSPAPERS SPREAD ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
OUR READERS AREN'T HERE IN
WASHINGTON.
THEY AREN'T UP IN NEW YORK.
THEY AREN'T THE PEOPLE WHO SEND
OTHER PEOPLE'S KIDS TO WAR.
THEY'RE THE PEOPLE WHO GET SENT
TO WAR.
AND WE FELT AN OBLIGATION TO
THEM TO EXPLAIN WHY THAT MIGHT
HAPPEN.
WE WERE DETERMINED TO SCRUTINIZE
THE ADMINISTRATION'S CASE FOR
WAR AS CLOSELY AS WE POSSIBLY
COULD, AND THAT'S WHAT WE SET
OUT TO DO.
Moyers: SO AS HE LISTENED TO
PUNDITS AND OFFICIALS TALKING
ABOUT SADDAM HUSSEIN'S SUPPOSED
CONNECTIONS TO 9/11, WALCOTT WAS
SKEPTICAL.
IT WAS NOT CLEAR TO US WHY
ANYONE WAS ASKING QUESTIONS
ABOUT IRAQ IN THE WAKE OF AN
ATTACK THAT HAD AL QAEDA WRITTEN
ALL OVER IT.
Moyers: HE ASSIGNED HIS TWO
TOP REPORTERS TO INVESTIGATE THE
CLAIMS.
BETWEEN THEM, WARREN STROBEL AND
JONATHAN LANDAY HAD MORE THAN 40
YEARS EXPERIENCE REPORTING ON
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND NATIONAL
SECURITY.
THEY HAD LOTS OF SOURCES TO CALL
ON.
WE WERE BASICALLY, I THINK,
HEARING TWO DIFFERENT MESSAGES
FROM... THERE'S A MESSAGE, THE
PUBLIC MESSAGE THE
ADMINISTRATION WAS GIVING OUT
ABOUT IRAQ.
IT'S W.M.D., THE FACT THERE WAS
AN IMMEDIATE THREAT, GRAVE
THREAT, GATHERING THREAT.
BUT THAT WAS SO DIFFERENT FROM
WHAT WE WERE HEARING FROM PEOPLE
ON THE INSIDE, PEOPLE WE HAD
KNOWN IN MANY CASES FOR YEARS
AND TRUSTED.
Moyers: THEY WENT ABOUT THEIR
REPORTING THE OLD-FASHIONED WAY
WITH SHOE LEATHER, TRACKING DOWN
AND MEETING WITH SOURCES DEEP
INSIDE THE INTELLIGENCE
COMMUNITY.
WHEN YOU'RE TALKING TO THE
WORKING GRUNTS, YOU KNOW,
UNIFORM MILITARY OFFICERS,
INTELLIGENCE PROFESSIONALS,
PROFESSIONAL DIPLOMATS, THOSE
PEOPLE ARE MORE LIKELY THAN
NOT-- NOT ALWAYS, OF COURSE, BUT
MORE LIKELY THAN NOT-- TO TELL
YOU SOME VERSION OF THE TRUTH,
AND TO BE KNOWLEDGEABLE ABOUT
WHAT THEY'RE TALKING ABOUT WHEN
IT COMES TO TERRORISM OR THE
MIDDLE EAST, THINGS LIKE THAT.
Moyers: STROBEL LEARNED THAT
WITHIN TWO WEEKS AFTER 9/11,
SENIOR INTELLIGENCE OFFICERS
WERE GROWING CONCERNED THAT THE
BUSH ADMINISTRATION WAS
STRETCHING LITTLE BITS AND
PIECES OF INFORMATION TO CONNECT
SADDAM HUSSEIN TO AL QAEDA WITH
NO HARD EVIDENCE.
THERE WAS A LOT OF SKEPTICISM
AMONG OUR EDITORS BECAUSE WHAT
WE WERE WRITING WAS SO AT ODDS
WITH WHAT MOST OF THE REST OF
THE WASHINGTON PRESS CORPS WAS
REPORTING AND SOME OF OUR PAPERS
FRANKLY, JUST DIDN'T RUN THE
STORIES.
THEY HAD ACCESS TO THE "NEW YORK
TIMES" WIRE AND THE "WASHINGTON
POST" WIRE, AND THEY CHOSE THOSE
STORIES INSTEAD.
Moyers: WITHIN THE MONTH,
STROBEL FOUND OUT THE PENTAGON
HAD ALREADY DISPATCHED JAMES
WOOLSEY TO EUROPE LOOKING FOR
ANY SHRED OF EVIDENCE TO
INCRIMINATE HUSSEIN.
HE DID THIS EVEN KNOWING THAT
THE C.I.A. HAD ALREADY ANALYZED
THIS CAREFULLY AND FOUND NO SUCH
LINKS.
SO THE MORE I THOUGHT ABOUT
THAT, THE MORE IT JUST DIDN'T
SEEM TO MAKE SENSE.
Moyers: KNIGHT RIDDER'S EARLY
SKEPTICISM WAS A RARITY INSIDE
THE BELTWAY BUBBLE.
A DECISION TO GO TO WAR, EVEN
AGAINST AN EIGHTH-RATE POWER
SUCH AS IRAQ, IS THE MOST
SERIOUS DECISION THAT A
GOVERNMENT CAN EVER MAKE AND IT
DESERVES THE MOST SERIOUS KIND
OF SCRUTINY THAT WE IN THE MEDIA
CAN GIVE IT.
IS THIS REALLY NECESSARY?
IS IT NECESSARY TO SEND OUR
YOUNG MEN AND WOMEN TO GO KILL
SOMEBODY ELSE'S YOUNG MEN AND
WOMEN?
Moyers: THAT MEANT ASKING
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE SOURCES OF
INFORMATION THE PRESS AND
GOVERNMENT WERE RELYING ON,
INCLUDING, NOTABLY, THIS MAN,
AHMED CHALABI.
AFTER THE FIRST GULF WAR,
AMERICANS HAD INSTALLED CHALABI
AS THE LEADER OF IRAQI EXILES
SEEKING REGIME CHANGE IN
BAGHDAD.
NOW HE WAS ALL OVER WASHINGTON
AS THE ADMINISTRATION'S AND THE
NEO-CONSERVATIVES' STAR WITNESS
AGAINST SADDAM.
HELLO.
CHALABI'S MOTIVES WERE ALWAYS
PERFECTLY CLEAR IN THIS AND
UNDERSTANDABLE.
HE WAS AN IRAQI.
HE DIDN'T WANT HIS COUNTRY RUN
BY A THUG AND A MURDERER, A MASS
MURDERER AND A CROOK, AND
EVERYTHING HE SAID HAD TO BE
LOOKED AT IN THAT LIGHT AND
SCRUTINIZED IN THAT LIGHT.
AND WHY ANYONE WOULD GIVE HIM A
FREE PASS, OR ANYONE ELSE A FREE
PASS FOR THAT MATTER, ON A
MATTER AS IMPORTANT AS GOING TO
WAR, IS BEYOND ME.
CHALABI WAS A CREATURE OF
AMERICAN PROPAGANDA TO A LARGE
DEGREE.
IT WAS AN AMERICAN COMPANY, THE
RENDON GROUP, THAT, WORKING
SECRETLY WITH THE C.I.A.,
BASICALLY CREATED HIS
ORGANIZATION, THE IRAQI NATIONAL
CONGRESS, AND PUT CHALABI IN
CHARGE, BASICALLY.
Moyers: JAMES BAMFORD IS AN
INDEPENDENT JOURNALIST WHOSE
SPECIALTY IS THE INTELLIGENCE
WORLD.
FROM THE VERY BEGINNING,
CHALABI WAS PAID A LOT OF MONEY
FROM THE U.S. TAXPAYERS.
THE C.I.A. PAID HIM ORIGINALLY
ABOUT $350,000 A MONTH TO
CHALABI AND HIS ORGANIZATION.
THE C.I.A. FINALLY CAUGHT ON IN
THE MID-'90s THAT CHALABI WAS A
CON MAN, BASICALLY, AND THEY
DROPPED HIM.
Moyers: CHALABI'S HANDLERS IN
WASHINGTON WERE NOT DETERRED BY
THAT STAIN ON HIS CREDIBILITY.
HE CHARMED CONGRESS OUT OF
MILLIONS MORE DOLLARS FOR HIS
CAUSE, AND HAD THE PRESS EATING
OUT OF HIS HAND.
HE MADE A LOT OF FRIENDS IN
THE MEDIA.
AND HE CONVINCED A LOT OF PEOPLE
THAT HE WAS LEGITIMATE EVEN
THOUGH THE C.I.A. HAD DROPPED
HIM.
Moyers: WHEN CHALABI MADE
SELECTED IRAQI DEFECTORS
AVAILABLE TO THE PRESS IT WAS A
WIN/WIN GAME: THE DEFECTORS GOT
A PLATFORM; JOURNALISTS GOT BIG
SCOOPS.
THERE WAS A BIG EFFORT, IN
FACT, TO FIND PEOPLE WHO SEEMED
TO HAVE CREDIBLE EVIDENCE ABOUT
WHAT WAS GOING ON INSIDE IRAQ.
BECAUSE, IN FACT, IF YOU COULD
FIND SOMEBODY WHO WAS CREDIBLE
TALKING ABOUT A NUCLEAR PROGRAM
IN IRAQ OR CHEMICAL WEAPONS,
THAT WOULD BE A BIG STORY.
Moyers: AND IT WORKED.
THE "NEW YORKER," "U.S. A.
TODAY," THE "WASHINGTON POST,"
THE "NEW YORK DAILY NEWS," THE
"NEW YORK TIMES."
AND ON PBS, JUST TWO MONTHS
AFTER 9/11, "FRONTLINE" AND THE
"NEW YORK TIMES" TEAMED UP FOR A
DOCUMENTARY ON THE DEFECTORS.
CAPTAIN SABAH KHODADA IS A
FORMER ARMY OFFICER WHO DEFECTED
FROM IRAQ.
HE MADE A CRUDE DRAWING OF WHAT
HE SAYS IS A TERRORIST TRAINING
CAMP ON THE OUTSKIRTS OF
BAGHDAD.
Moyers: THERE WERE CAVEATS.
AND A FURTHER CAUTION: THESE
DEFECTORS HAVE BEEN BROUGHT TO
"FRONTLINE'S" ATTENTION BY ONE
GROUP OF IRAQI DISSIDENTS, THE
I.N.C., THE IRAQI NATIONAL
CONGRESS.
Moyers: BUT THE CAVEATS
COULDN'T COMPETE WITH THE
SPECTACULAR TALES TOLD BY
DEFECTORS.
BEFORE THE INVASION THE "NEW
YORK TIME'S" JUDITH MILLER WOULD
WRITE SIX PROMINENT STORIES
BASED ON THEIR TESTIMONY.
AHMED CHALABI IS A
CONTROVERSIAL LEADER OF THE
IRAQI OPPOSITION.
Moyers: AND STILL ON THE WEB,
A REPORT ABOUT THE DEFECTORS,
NARRATED BY JUDITH MILLER AND
PRODUCED BY "NEW YORK TIMES"
TELEVISION FOR THE "NEWSHOUR" ON
PBS.
WELL, JUDY MILLER HAD BEEN AN
OLD FRIEND OF CHALABI, DID A LOT
OF THE STORIES ON CHALABI, WAS
VERY FAVORABLE TO CHALABI.
Moyers: JAMES BAMFORD FOUND
OUT THAT IN 2001, CHALABI HAD
ARRANGED FOR MILLER TO MEET IN
THAILAND WITH A DEFECTOR FROM
IRAQ NAMED AL-HAIDERI.
SO, AL-HAIDERI WAS IN
BANGKOK.
JUDY MILLER FLEW THERE TO
INTERVIEW HIM.
THE "NEW YORK TIMES" RAN A
FRONT-PAGE STORY BASICALLY
CONFIRMING EVERYTHING THE
ADMINISTRATION HAD BEEN SAYING
ABOUT IRAQ.
Moyers: AL-HAIDERI SAID HE
WAS A KURD FROM NORTHERN IRAQ.
HE TOLD MILLER THE IRAQIS HAD
HIDDEN CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL
WEAPONS; SOME, MILLER REPORTED,
RIGHT UNDER SADDAM'S
PRESIDENTIAL SITES.
THE STORY SPREAD FAR AND WIDE.
THE "NEW YORK TIMES" IS
JUST... REMAINS IMMENSELY
INFLUENTIAL.
PEOPLE IN THE TV WORLD READ IT
EVERY MORNING.
AND IT'S AMAZING HOW OFTEN
YOU'LL SEE A STORY GO FROM THE
FRONT PAGE OF THE DAY'S PAPER IN
THE MORNING TO THE EVENING
NEWSCAST AT NIGHT.
PEOPLE IN GOVERNMENT, OF COURSE,
READ IT, THINK TANKS, AND SO ON.
THERE WERE SOME RED FLAGS
THAT THE "NEW YORK TIMES" STORY
THREW OUT IMMEDIATELY, WHICH
CAUGHT OUR EYE IMMEDIATELY.
THE FIRST WAS THE IDEA THAT A
KURD, THE ENEMY OF SADDAM, HAD
BEEN ALLOWED INTO HIS MOST TOP
SECRET MILITARY FACILITIES.
I DON'T THINK SO.
THAT WAS, FOR ME, THE BIGGEST
RED FLAG.
AND THERE WERE OTHERS, LIKE THE
IDEA THAT SADDAM HUSSEIN WOULD
PUT A BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS
FACILITY UNDER HIS RESIDENCE.
I MEAN, WOULD YOU PUT A
BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS LAB UNDER
YOUR LIVING ROOM?
I DON'T THINK SO.
THE FIRST RULE OF BEING AN
INTELLIGENCE AGENT, OR A
JOURNALIST-- AND THEY'RE REALLY
NOT THAT DIFFERENT-- IS YOU'RE
SKEPTICAL OF DEFECTORS BECAUSE
THEY HAVE A REASON TO
EXAGGERATE.
THEY WANT TO INCREASE THEIR
VALUE TO YOU.
THEY PROBABLY WANT SOMETHING
FROM YOU.
DOESN'T MEAN THEY'RE LYING, BUT
YOU SHOULD BE... JOURNALISTS ARE
SUPPOSED TO BE SKEPTICAL, RIGHT?
AND I'M AFRAID THE "NEW YORK
TIMES" REPORTER IN THAT CASE,
AND A LOT OF OTHER REPORTERS,
WERE JUST NOT SKEPTICAL OF WHAT
THESE DEFECTORS WERE SAYING, NOR
WAS THE ADMINISTRATION.
A FORMER TOP IRAQI NUCLEAR
SCIENTIST TELLS CONGRESS IRAQ
COULD BUILD THREE NUCLEAR BOMBS
BY 2005.
WELL, NOW ANOTHER DEFECTOR,
A SENIOR IRAQI INTELLIGENCE
OFFICIAL, TELLS "VANITY FAIR" IN
AN EXCLUSIVE INTERVIEW THAT
SADDAM HUSSEIN HAS TRAINED AN
ELITE FIGHTING FORCE IN
SABOTAGE, URBAN WARFARE,
HIJACKING AND MURDER.
DAVID ROSE WROTE THE STORY, HE
JOINS US NOW FROM LONDON.
Moyers: IN "VANITY FAIR'S"
DAVID ROSE, DEFECTORS FOUND
ANOTHER EAGER BEAVER FOR THEIR
CLAIMS.
THE GLOSSY MAGAZINE, A FAVORITE
OF MEDIA ELITES, GAVE HIM FOUR
BIG SPREADS TO TELL DEFECTOR
STORIES.
THE TALK SHOWS LAPPED IT UP.
WHAT THE DEFECTOR, AL-
QURAIRY, A FORMER BRIGADIER
GENERAL IN THE IRAQI
INTELLIGENCE SERVICE, TOLD ME IS
THAT THESE GUYS-- THERE ARE
1,200 IN ALL-- AND THEY'VE BEEN
TRAINED TO HIJACK TRAINS, BUSES,
SHIPS, AND SO FORTH.
AS YOU TRACK THEIR STORIES,
THEY BECOME EVER MORE FANTASTIC,
AND THEY'RE THE SAME PEOPLE WHO
ARE TELLING THESE STORIES, UNTIL
YOU GET TO THE MOST FANTASTIC
TALES OF ALL, WHICH APPEARED IN
"VANITY FAIR" MAGAZINE.
THE LAST TRAINING EXERCISE
WAS TO BLOW UP A FULL-SIZE
MOCKUP OF A U.S. DESTROYER IN A
LAKE IN CENTRAL IRAQ.
OR JUMPING INTO PITS OF
FOULED WATER AND HAVING TO KILL
A DOG WITH YOUR BARE TEETH.
I MEAN, THE... AND THIS WAS
COMING FROM PEOPLE WHO ARE
APPEARING IN ALL OF THESE
STORIES, AND AS I... AND
SOMETIMES THEIR RANK WOULD
CHANGE.
MUSAWI TOLD US THAT HE HAS
VERIFIED THAT THIS MAN WAS AN
OFFICER IN IRAQ'S RUTHLESS
INTELLIGENCE SERVICE, THE
MUKHABARAT.
AND YOU'RE SAYING, "WAIT A
MINUTE, THERE'S SOMETHING WRONG
HERE, BECAUSE IN THIS STORY HE
WAS A MAJOR, BUT IN THIS STORY
THE GUY'S A COLONEL.
AND IN THIS STORY THIS WAS HIS
FUNCTION, BUT NOW HE SAYS IN
THIS STORY HE WAS DOING
SOMETHING ELSE."
THE DEFECTOR IS TELLING
MUSAWI THAT IN ORDER TO EVADE
THE U.N. INSPECTORS, SADDAM
HUSSEIN PUT HIS BIOLOGICAL
WEAPONS LABORATORIES IN TRUCKS
THAT THE DEFECTOR TOLD US HE
PERSONALLY BOUGHT FROM RENAULT.
REFRIGERATOR TRUCKS?
YEAH, YEAH.
AND HOW MANY?
SEVEN.
Moyers: LESLIE STAHL AND CBS
RETRACTED THEIR STORY A YEAR
AFTER THE INVASION WHEN NEARLY
ALL THE EVIDENCE PRESENTED BY
DEFECTORS PROVED TO BE FALSE.
"VANITY FAIR'S" DAVID ROSE LATER
SAID HIGH GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS
HAD CONFIRMED HIS STORIES, BUT
THESE WERE THE VERY OFFICIALS
WHO HAD BET ON CHALABI AS THEIR
FAVORITE MAN O' WAR.
TO THE KNIGHT RIDDER TEAM IT ALL
SMELLED OF A CON GAME.
WHAT HE DID WAS REASONABLY
CLEVER, BUT FAIRLY OBVIOUS,
WHICH IS HE GAVE THE SAME STUFF
TO SOME REPORTERS THAT, FOR ONE
REASON OR ANOTHER, HE FELT WOULD
SIMPLY REPORT IT.
AND THEN HE GAVE THE SAME STUFF
TO PEOPLE IN THE VICE
PRESIDENT'S OFFICE AND IN THE
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE'S OFFICE.
AND SO, IF THE REPORTER CALLED
THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE OR THE
VICE PRESIDENT'S OFFICE TO
CHECK, THEY WOULD'VE SAID, "OH,
I THINK THAT'S... YOU CAN GO
WITH THAT.
WE HAVE THAT, TOO."
SO YOU CREATE THE APPEARANCE, OR
CHALABI CREATED THE APPEARANCE,
THAT THERE WERE TWO SOURCES AND
THAT THE INFORMATION HAD BEEN
INDEPENDENTLY CONFIRMED, WHEN,
IN FACT, THERE WAS ONLY ONE
SOURCE AND IT HADN'T BEEN
CONFIRMED BY ANYBODY.
AND LET'S NOT FORGET HOW
CLOSE THESE PEOPLE WERE TO THIS
ADMINISTRATION, WHICH RAISES THE
QUESTION: WAS THERE
COORDINATION?
I CAN'T TELL YOU THAT THERE WAS,
BUT IT SURE LOOKED LIKE IT.
Moyers: THE ADMINISTRATION
WAS NOW STEPPING UP EFFORTS TO
NAIL DOWN A TANGIBLE LINK
BETWEEN SADDAM AND 9/11.
JOURNALISTS WERE TIPPED TO A
MEETING THAT SUPPOSEDLY TOOK
PLACE IN PRAGUE BETWEEN IRAQI
AGENTS AND THE 9/11 RINGLEADER,
MOHAMMED ATTA.
PUNDITS HAD A FIELD DAY.
HE HAS CONTACTS OUTSIDE IN
SUDAN AND AFGHANISTAN WITH
TERRORISTS.
HE MET... THEY DID INDEED HAVE A
CONTACT BETWEEN ATTA AND AN
IRAQI DIPLOMAT.
Moyers: IN THE "NEW YORK
TIMES," WILLIAM SAFIRE CALLED
THE PRAGUE MEETING AN
"UNDISPUTED FACT."
HE WOULD WRITE ABOUT THE ATTA
CONNECTION TEN TIMES IN HIS OP-
ED COLUMN.
JUST WEEKS AFTER 9/11, SAFIRE
HAD PREDICTED A QUICK WAR, WITH
IRAQIS CHEERING THEIR LIBERATORS
AND LEADING THE ARAB WORLD
TOWARD DEMOCRACY.
BETWEEN MARCH 2002 AND THE
INVASION A YEAR LATER, SAFIRE
WOULD WRITE A TOTAL OF 27
OPINION PIECES FANNING THE
SPARKS OF WAR.
AND ON TIM RUSSERT'S "MEET THE
PRESS," SAFIRE KEPT IT UP.
BILL SAFIRE, THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN SUFFICIENT PROVOCATION
AND A PREEMPTIVE STRIKE?
I DON'T THINK WE NEED ANY
MORE PROVOCATION THAN WE'VE HAD
BY TEN YEARS OF BREAKING HIS
AGREEMENT AT THE CEASE FIRE.
HE HAS BEEN BUILDING WEAPONS OF
MASS DESTRUCTION.
Moyers: IN OCTOBER, HIS OWN
PAPER RAN A FRONT-PAGE STORY BY
JAMES RISEN QUESTIONING THE
EVIDENCE.
THEN CAME THIS REPORT FROM BOB
SIMON.
THE ADMINISTRATION HAS BEEN
TRYING TO MAKE THE LINK TO
IMPLICATE SADDAM HUSSEIN IN THE
ATTACKS OF SEPTEMBER 11, AND
THEY'VE BEEN POINTING TO AN
ALLEGED MEETING BETWEEN MOHAMMED
ATTA, THE LEAD HIJACKER, AND AN
IRAQI INTELLIGENCE OFFICER IN
THE CZECH CAPITAL OF PRAGUE.
IF WE HAD COMBED PRAGUE AND
FOUND OUT THAT THERE WAS
ABSOLUTELY NO EVIDENCE FOR A
MEETING BETWEEN MOHAMMAD ATTA
AND THE IRAQI INTELLIGENCE
FIGURE, IF WE KNEW THAT, YOU HAD
TO FIGURE THAT THE
ADMINISTRATION KNEW IT.
AND YET THEY WERE SELLING THE
CONNECTION BETWEEN AL QAEDA AND
SADDAM.
BOB BAER SPENT 16 YEARS AS AN
UNDERCOVER AGENT FOR THE C.I.A.
IN THE MIDDLE EAST.
Moyers: HOW DID YOU GET TO
BOB BAER, THE FORMER C.I.A.
OFFICIAL, WHO WAS SUCH AN
IMPORTANT SOURCE FOR YOU?
WE CALLED HIM.
( LAUGHS )
Moyers: HOW DID YOU FIND HIM?
DID YOU KNOW HIM?
I KNEW SOME FRIENDS OF HIS.
IT WAS... IT WASN'T A PROBLEM
GETTING HIS PHONE NUMBER.
I MEAN, ANY REPORTER COULD GET
HIS PHONE NUMBER.
Moyers: WHO WAS HE?
AND WHAT... WHY WAS HE
IMPORTANT?
HE WAS ONE OF THE GUYS WHO
WAS SENT TO PRAGUE TO FIND THAT
LINK.
HE WAS SENT TO FIND THE LINK
BETWEEN AL QAEDA AND SADDAM.
Moyers: HE WOULD HAVE BEEN A
HERO IF HE'D FOUND THE LINK.
OH, MY HEAVENS, YES.
I MEAN, THIS WAS WHAT EVERYONE
WAS LOOKING FOR.
Moyers: BUT THERE WAS LITTLE
APPETITE INSIDE THE NETWORKS FOR
TAKING ON A POPULAR WARTIME
PRESIDENT, SO SIMON DECIDED TO
WRAP HIS STORY INSIDE A MORE
BENIGN ACCOUNT OF HOW THE WHITE
HOUSE WAS MARKETING THE WAR.
IT'S NOT THE FIRST TIME A
PRESIDENT HAS MOUNTED A SALES
CAMPAIGN TO SELL A WAR.
AND I THINK WE ALL FELT FROM THE
BEGINNING THAT TO DEAL WITH A
SUBJECT AS EXPLOSIVE AS THIS, WE
SHOULD KEEP IT IN A WAY ALMOST
LIGHT, IF THAT DOESN'T SEEM
RIDICULOUS.
Moyers: GOING TO WAR, ALMOST
LIGHT.
NOT TO PRESENT IT AS A
FRONTAL ATTACK ON THE
ADMINISTRATION'S CLAIMS, WHICH
WOULD HAVE BEEN NOT ONLY
PREMATURE, BUT WE DIDN'T HAVE
THE AMMUNITION TO DO IT AT THE
TIME.
WE DID NOT KNOW THEN THAT THERE
WERE NO MASS... WEAPONS OF MASS
DESTRUCTION IN IRAQ.
WE ONLY KNEW THAT THE CONNECTION
THE ADMINISTRATION WAS MAKING
BETWEEN SADDAM AND AL QAEDA WAS
VERY TENUOUS AT BEST AND THAT
THE ARGUMENT IT WAS MAKING OVER
THE ALUMINUM TUBES SEEMED HIGHLY
DUBIOUS.
WE KNEW THESE THINGS.
AND THEREFORE WE COULD PRESENT
THE MADISON AVENUE CAMPAIGN ON
THESE THINGS, WHICH WAS A SORT
OF SOFTER, LESS CONFRONTATIONAL
WAY OF DOING IT.
Moyers: DID YOU GO TO ANY OF
THE BRASS AT CBS, EVEN AT "60
MINUTES," AND SAY, "LOOK, WE GOT
TO DIG DEEPER.
WE GOT TO CONNECT THE DOTS.
THIS ISN'T RIGHT."
NO.
IN ALL HONESTY, WITH A THOUSAND
MEA CULPAS, I'VE DONE A FEW
STORIES IN IRAQ.
BUT NOPE, I DON'T THINK WE
FOLLOWED UP ON THIS.
IRAQ IS IN POSSESSION OF
WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
CONTRARY TO THEIR PROMISES...
Moyers: WHAT THE WHITE HOUSE
WAS NOW MARKETING AS FACT WOULD
GO VIRTUALLY UNCHALLENGED.
WE KNOW THEY HAVE WEAPONS OF
MASS DESTRUCTION, WE KNOW THEY
HAVE ACTIVE PROGRAMS.
Moyers: AS THE "WASHINGTON
POST'S" VETERAN REPORTER, WALTER
PINCUS, WOULD LATER REPORT, THE
PROPAGANDA MACHINE WAS RUN BY
THE PRESIDENT'S INNER CIRCLE,
OFFICIALS WHO CALLED THEMSELVES
THE WHITE HOUSE IRAQ GROUP, OR
"WHIG."
YOU WROTE THAT WHIG INCLUDED
KARL ROVE, THE CHIEF OF STAFF,
ANDREW CARD, MARY MATALIN, CONDI
RICE, STEVEN HADLEY, LEWIS
LIBBY, AND THEY WERE IN CHARGE
OF SELLING THE WAR.
SELLING THE WAR, YEAH.
GOOD EVENING.
A LONG YEAR HAS PASSED SINCE
ENEMIES ATTACKED OUR COUNTRY.
Moyers: THEIR CHIEF SALESMAN
HAD THE BEST PROPS AT HIS
DISPOSAL.
AND WE WILL NOT ALLOW ANY
TERRORIST OR TYRANT TO THREATEN
CIVILIZATION WITH WEAPONS OF
MASS MURDER.
THEY CREATED THAT LINK.
Moyers: THE MARKETING GROUP?
THE MARKETING GROUP.
AND THE LINK WAS A TWO-FOLD
LINK: ONE, HE HAD WEAPONS OF
MASS DESTRUCTION; AND TWO, HE
SUPPORTED TERRORISTS.
AND THEY REPEATED IT EVERY DAY.
ANYBODY WHO WATCHES TELEVISION
THESE DAYS KNOWS YOU SELL A
PRODUCT NOT JUST BY SAYING IT
ONCE, BY SAYING IT OVER AND OVER
AGAIN WITH NEW SPOKESMEN TWO,
THREE TIMES A DAY, AND IT SINKS
INTO THE PUBLIC.
Moyers: IS THERE ANYTHING
UNUSUAL ABOUT AN ADMINISTRATION
MARKETING ITS POLICY?
IT'S... I THINK EACH
ADMINISTRATION HAS LEARNED FROM
THE OTHER, AND WITH THIS GROUP
IS JUST THE CLEVEREST I'VE EVER
SEEN AND TOOK IT TO NEW HEIGHTS.
THE TV, RADIO, PRINT, OTHER
MEDIA OUTLETS ARE AS CRUCIAL TO
GOING TO WAR AS THE BOMBS AND
THE BULLETS AND THE PLANES.
THEY'RE PART OF THE ARSENAL, THE
PROPAGANDA WEAPONRY, IF YOU
WILL.
AND THAT'S TOTALLY UNDERSTOOD
ACROSS THE BOARD AT THE
PENTAGON, THE WHITE HOUSE, THE
STATE DEPARTMENT.
A PROVEN MENACE LIKE SADDAM
HUSSEIN IN POSSESSION OF WEAPONS
OF MASS DESTRUCTION...
THE IRAQI REGIME POSSESSES
BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WEAPONS.
WE DO HAVE SOLID EVIDENCE OF
THE PRESENCE IN IRAQ OF AL QAEDA
MEMBERS.
THE REGIME HAS LONG-STANDING
AND CONTINUING TIES TO TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS.
JUST REPEAT IT AND REPEAT IT
AND REPEAT IT.
REPEAT "AL QAEDA, IRAQ.
AL QAEDA, IRAQ.
AL QAEDA, IRAQ."
JUST KEEP IT GOING.
KEEP THAT DRUMBEAT GOING.
AND IT WAS EFFECTIVE BECAUSE
LONG AFTER IT WAS WELL
ESTABLISHED THAT THERE WAS NO
LINK BETWEEN AL QAEDA AND THE
GOVERNMENT OF IRAQ AND THE
SADDAM REGIME, THE POLLS SHOWED
THAT AN OVERWHELMING MAJORITY OF
AMERICANS BELIEVED THAT AL
QAEDA... THAT IRAQ WAS
RESPONSIBLE FOR SEPTEMBER 11.
MOST PEOPLE ACTUALLY BELIEVED
AND ACCEPTED THAT SADDAM HUSSEIN
HAD WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION.
I HAVE TO ADMIT THAT UNTIL WE
REALLY STARTED BURROWING INTO
THE STORY THAT I BELIEVED IT,
TOO.
IS THIS SOMETHING THAT THEY
COULD GO ALONG WITH...
Moyers: LANDAY FOUND PLENTY
OF EVIDENCE TO CONTRADICT THE
OFFICIAL PROPAGANDA, AND THE
FACTS QUICKLY CHANGED HIS MIND.
I SIMPLY SPENT BASICALLY A
MONTH FAMILIARIZING MYSELF WITH
WHAT SADDAM'S WEAPONS OF MASS
DESTRUCTION PROGRAMS HAD BEEN
AND WHAT HAD HAPPENED TO THEM.
AND THERE WAS TONS OF MATERIAL
AVAILABLE ON THAT FROM THE U.N.
WEAPONS INSPECTORS.
I MEAN, THEY GOT INTO VIRTUALLY
EVERYTHING, AND THEIR REPORTS
WERE ONLINE.
IF YOU GO DOWN HERE, THE IRAQ
NUCLEAR VERIFICATION OFFICE,
THEY PUT UP REGULAR... "HERE YOU
GO" KEY FINDINGS, WHAT THEY
FOUND OUT ABOUT IRAQ'S NUCLEAR
WEAPONS PROGRAMS.
IT'S ALL HERE IN THE OPEN FOR
ANYBODY WHO WANTS TO READ IT.
Moyers: INTERNATIONAL
INSPECTORS HAD GONE INTO IRAQ
AFTER THE FIRST GULF WAR TO
SEARCH FOR AND TO DESTROY SADDAM
HUSSIN'S WEAPONS SYSTEMS.
LATE IN 1998, THE INSPECTIONS
CAME TO AN ABRUPT HALT AFTER THE
IRAQI GOVERNMENT REFUSED TO
COOPERATE, BUT THAT HARDLY MEANT
NO ONE WAS WATCHING.
DURING THE PERIOD OF TIME
BETWEEN WHEN THE INSPECTORS LEFT
IRAQ, WHICH WAS IN 1998, THE END
OF 1998, AND THEN, THE UNITED
STATES HAD COVERED THE PLACE
WITH SPY SATELLITES AND U2
OVERFLIGHTS, AND, YOU KNOW, THE
OTHER INTELLIGENCE SERVICES HAD
THEIR EYEBALLS ON THIS PLACE.
THERE IS A GREAT DANGER
THAT...
Moyers: THAT'S WHY LANDAY WAS
SURPRISED BY WHAT VICE PRESIDENT
CHENEY TOLD A GROUP OF VETERANS
IN LATE AUGUST 2002.
MANY OF US ARE CONVINCED THAT
SADDAM HUSSEIN WILL ACQUIRE
NUCLEAR WEAPONS FAIRLY SOON.
AND I LOOKED AT THAT AND I
SAID, "WHAT IS HE TALKING
ABOUT?"
BECAUSE TO DEVELOP A NUCLEAR
WEAPON, YOU NEED SPECIFIC
INFRASTRUCTURE, AND, IN
PARTICULAR, THE WAY THE IRAQIS
WERE TRYING TO PRODUCE A NUCLEAR
WEAPON WAS THROUGH ENRICHMENT OF
URANIUM.
NOW, YOU NEED TENS OF THOUSANDS
OF MACHINES CALLED CENTRIFUGES
TO PRODUCE HIGHLY ENRICHED
URANIUM FOR A NUCLEAR WEAPON.
YOU'VE GOT TO HOUSE THOSE IN A
FAIRLY BIG PLACE, AND YOU'VE GOT
TO PROVIDE A HUGE AMOUNT OF
POWER TO THIS FACILITY.
COULD HE REALLY HAVE DONE IT
WITH ALL OF THESE EYES ON HIS
COUNTRY?
BUT WE NOW KNOW THAT SADDAM
HAS RESUMED HIS EFFORTS TO
ACQUIRE NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
SO, WHEN CHENEY SAID THAT, I
GOT ON THE PHONE TO PEOPLE, AND
ONE PERSON SAID TO ME-- SOMEBODY
WHO WATCHED PROLIFERATION AS
THEIR JOB-- SAID, "THE VICE
PRESIDENT IS LYING."
Moyers: ON THE BASIS OF HIS
INTELLIGENCE SOURCES, LANDAY
WROTE THERE WAS LITTLE EVIDENCE
TO BACK UP THE VICE PRESIDENT'S
CLAIMS.
BUT THE STORY LANDAY WROTE
DIDN'T RUN IN NEW YORK OR
WASHINGTON; KNIGHT RIDDER,
REMEMBER, HAS NO OUTLET IN
EITHER CITY.
SO IT COULDN'T COMPETE WITH A
BLOCKBUSTER THAT APPEARED TWO
DAYS LATER ON THE FRONT PAGE OF
THE NATION'S PAPER OF RECORD
WITH A FAMILIAR BYLINE.
QUOTING ANONYMOUS ADMINISTRATION
OFFICIALS, THE "TIMES" REPORTED
THAT SADDAM HUSSEIN HAD LAUNCHED
"A WORLDWIDE HUNT FOR MATERIALS
TO MAKE AN ATOMIC BOMB USING
SPECIALLY DESIGNED ALUMINUM
TUBES."
AND THERE, ON "MEET THE PRESS"
THAT SAME MORNING, WAS VICE
PRESIDENT CHENEY.
THERE'S A STORY IN THE "NEW
YORK TIMES" THIS MORNING, THIS
IS-- AND I WANT TO ATTRIBUTE
IT TO THE "TIMES"-- I DON'T WANT
TO TALK ABOUT OBVIOUSLY SPECIFIC
INTELLIGENCE SOURCES, BUT...
NOW, ORDINARILY, INFORMATION
LIKE THE ALUMINUM TUBES,
WOULD... WOULDN'T APPEAR... IT
WAS TOP SECRET INTELLIGENCE, AND
THE VICE PRESIDENT AND THE
NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISOR WOULD
NOT BE ALLOWED TO TALK ABOUT
THIS ON THE SUNDAY TALK SHOWS.
BUT IT APPEARED THAT MORNING IN
THE "NEW YORK TIMES" AND,
THEREFORE, THEY WERE ABLE TO
TALK ABOUT IT.
IT'S NOW PUBLIC THAT, IN
FACT, HE HAS BEEN SEEKING TO
ACQUIRE AND WE HAVE BEEN ABLE TO
INTERCEPT TO PREVENT HIM FROM
ACQUIRING THROUGH THIS
PARTICULAR CHANNEL THE KINDS OF
TUBES THAT ARE NECESSARY TO
BUILD A CENTRIFUGE, AND THE
CENTRIFUGE IS REQUIRED TO TAKE
LOW-GRADE URANIUM AND ENHANCE IT
INTO HIGHLY ENRICHED URANIUM,
WHICH IS WHAT YOU HAVE TO HAVE
IN ORDER TO BUILD A BOMB.
Moyers: DID YOU SEE THAT
PERFORMANCE?
I DID.
Moyers: WHAT DID YOU THINK?
I THOUGHT IT WAS REMARKABLE.
Moyers: WHY?
REMARKABLE.
YOU LEAK A STORY, AND THEN YOU
QUOTE THE STORY.
I MEAN, THAT'S A REMARKABLE
THING TO DO.
Moyers: AND THAT'S ONLY PART
OF IT.
USING THE IDENTICAL LANGUAGE OF
THE ANONYMOUS SOURCES QUOTED IN
THE "TIMES," TOP OFFICIALS WERE
NOW INVOKING THE ULTIMATE
SPECTER OF NUCLEAR WAR: THE
SMOKING GUN AS MUSHROOM CLOUD.
THERE WILL ALWAYS BE SOME
UNCERTAINTY ABOUT HOW QUICKLY HE
CAN ACQUIRE A NUCLEAR WEAPON,
BUT WE DON'T WANT THE SMOKING
GUN TO BE A MUSHROOM CLOUD.
THOSE SORTS OF STORIES, WHEN
THEY APPEAR ON THE FRONT PAGE OF
THE SO-CALLED LIBERAL "NEW YORK
TIMES," IT ABSOLUTELY COMES WITH
A STAMP OF APPROVAL.
I MEAN, IF THE "NEW YORK TIMES"
THINKS SADDAM IS ON THE
PRECIPICE OF SOME MUSHROOM
CLOUDS, THEN THERE'S REALLY NO
DEBATE.
WE READ IN THE "NEW YORK
TIMES" TODAY A STORY THAT SAYS
THAT SADDAM HUSSEIN IS CLOSER TO
ACQUIRING NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
DOES HE HAVE NUCLEAR WEAPONS?
IS THERE A SMOKING GUN HERE?
"THE SMOKING GUN" IS AN
INTERESTING PHRASE.
THEN AS WE SAW IN REPORTING
JUST THIS MORNING...
WHAT SPECIFICALLY HAS HE
OBTAINED THAT YOU BELIEVE WILL
ENHANCE HIS NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAM?
Moyers: WAS IT JUST A
COINCIDENCE IN YOUR MIND THAT
CHENEY CAME ON YOUR SHOW AND
OTHERS WENT ON THE OTHER SUNDAY
SHOWS THE VERY MORNING THAT THAT
STORY APPEARED?
I DON'T KNOW.
THE "NEW YORK TIMES" IS A BETTER
JUDGE OF THAT THAN I AM.
Moyers: NO ONE TIPPED YOU
THAT IT WAS GOING TO HAPPEN?
NO, NO.
I MEAN...
Moyers: THE CHENEY OFFICE
DIDN'T MAKE ANY... DIDN'T LEAK
TO YOU THAT THERE'S GOING TO BE
A BIG STORY?
NO.
( LAUGHS )
I MEAN, I DON'T... I DON'T HAVE
THE... THIS IS... YOU KNOW, ON
"MEET THE PRESS," PEOPLE COME ON
AND THERE ARE NO GROUND RULES.
WE CAN ASK ANY QUESTION WE WANT.
I DID NOT KNOW ABOUT THE
ALUMINUM TUBE STORY UNTIL I READ
IT IN THE "NEW YORK TIMES."
Moyers: CRITICS POINT TO
SEPTEMBER 8, 2002, AND TO YOUR
SHOW IN PARTICULAR, AS THE
CLASSIC CASE OF HOW THE PRESS
AND THE GOVERNMENT BECAME
INSEPARABLE.
SOMEONE IN THE ADMINISTRATION
PLANTS A DRAMATIC STORY IN THE
"NEW YORK TIMES" AND THEN THE
VICE PRESIDENT COMES ON YOUR
SHOW AND POINTS TO THE "NEW YORK
TIMES."
IT'S A CIRCULAR, SELF-CONFIRMING
LEAK.
I DON'T KNOW HOW JUDITH
MILLER AND MICHAEL GORDON
REPORTED THAT STORY, WHO THEIR
SOURCES WERE.
IT WAS A FRONT-PAGE STORY OF THE
"NEW YORK TIMES."
WHEN SECRETARY RICE AND VICE
PRESIDENT CHENEY AND OTHERS CAME
UP THAT SUNDAY MORNING ON ALL
THE SUNDAY SHOWS, THEY DID
EXACTLY THAT.
WHAT MY CONCERN WAS, IS THAT
THERE WERE CONCERNS EXPRESSED BY
OTHER GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS.
AND TO THIS DAY, I WISH MY PHONE
HAD RUNG OR I HAD ACCESS TO
THEM.
Moyers: BOB SIMON DIDN'T WAIT
FOR THE PHONE TO RING.
WHEN YOU SAID A MOMENT AGO WHEN
WE STARTED TALKING TO PEOPLE WHO
KNEW ABOUT ALUMINUM TUBES, WHAT
PEOPLE... WHO WERE YOU TALKING
TO?
WE WERE TALKING TO PEOPLE, TO
SCIENTISTS... TO SCIENTISTS AND
TO RESEARCHERS AND TO PEOPLE WHO
HAD BEEN INVESTIGATING IRAQ FROM
THE START.
Moyers: WOULD THESE PEOPLE
HAVE BEEN AVAILABLE TO ANY
REPORTER WHO CALLED OR WERE THEY
EXCLUSIVE SOURCES FOR "60
MINUTES"?
NO, I THINK THAT MANY OF THEM
WOULD HAVE BEEN AVAILABLE TO ANY
REPORTER WHO CALLED.
Moyers: AND YOU JUST PICKED
UP THE PHONE?
JUST PICKED UP THE PHONE.
Moyers: TALKED TO THEM?
TALKED TO THEM AND THEN WENT
DOWN WITH THE CAMERAS.
Moyers: FEW JOURNALISTS
FOLLOWED SUIT.
AND THROUGHOUT THE FALL OF 2002,
HIGH OFFICIALS WERE REPEATING
APOCALYPTIC WARNINGS WITH
VIRTUALLY NO DEMAND FROM THE
ESTABLISHMENT PRESS FOR
EVIDENCE.
FACING CLEAR EVIDENCE OF
PERIL, WE CANNOT WAIT FOR THE
FINAL PROOF-- THE SMOKING GUN--
THAT COULD COME IN THE FORM OF A
MUSHROOM CLOUD.
Moyers: COULD MEMBERS OF THE
PRESS HAVE KNOWN AT THAT POINT
THAT THE ADMINISTRATION WAS
EXAGGERATING?
INDIVIDUALS DID IT.
THERE WERE SPECIALISTS WHO WERE
RAISING QUESTIONS.
AND ONE OF OUR REPORTERS, JOBY
WARRICK, WROTE A VERY TOUGH
PIECE ABOUT NOT JUST THE
DISAGREEMENT, BUT... BUT HOW
DOUBTFUL IT WAS THAT THESE TUBES
WERE FOR NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
IT WAS A ONE-DAY PIECE IN OUR
PAPER, AND IT WASN'T PICKED UP.
Moyers: BUT WARRICK'S STORY
APPEARED ON PAGE 18, NOT PAGE
ONE.
THE FRONT PAGE OF THE
"WASHINGTON POST" OR ANY
NEWSPAPER IS A BILLBOARD OF WHAT
THE EDITORS ARE TELLING YOU,
"THESE ARE THE MOST IMPORTANT
STORIES OF THE DAY. "
AND STORIES THAT DON'T RUN ON
THE FRONT PAGE, THE READER SORT
OF GETS THAT, WELL, THESE ARE OF
SECONDARY IMPORTANCE.
Moyers: HOWARD KURTZ IS THE
"WASHINGTON POST" MEDIA CRITIC.
I WENT BACK AND DID THE MATH.
FROM AUGUST 2002 UNTIL THE WAR
WAS LAUNCHED IN MARCH OF 2003
THERE WERE ABOUT 140 FRONT-PAGE
PIECES IN THE "WASHINGTON POST"
MAKING THE ADMINISTRATION'S CASE
FOR WAR.
IT WAS, "THE PRESIDENT SAID
YESTERDAY," "THE VICE PRESIDENT
SAID YESTERDAY," "THE PENTAGON
SAID YESTERDAY."
WELL, THAT'S PART OF OUR JOB.
THOSE PEOPLE WANT TO SPEAK, WE
HAVE TO PROVIDE THEM A PLATFORM.
I DON'T HAVE ANYTHING WRONG WITH
THAT.
BUT THERE WAS ONLY A HANDFUL...
A HANDFUL OF STORIES THAT RAN ON
THE FRONT PAGE, SOME MORE THAT
RAN INSIDE THE PAGES OF THE
PAPER THAT MADE THE OPPOSITE
CASE.
OR, IF NOT MAKING THE OPPOSITE
CASE, RAISED QUESTIONS.
"WAS THIS REALLY TRUE?
WHAT WAS THE LEVEL OF PROOF?
DID THE C.I.A. REALLY KNOW?
WHAT WERE THOSE ALUMINUM TUBES?"
THOSE STORIES, AND SOME
REPORTERS WORKED HARD ON THEM,
HAD A HARDER TIME GETTING ON THE
FRONT PAGE.
WHY?
BECAUSE THEY WEREN'T DEFINITIVE.
Moyers: BUT WHO DEFINES
DEFINITIVE?
REPORTER WALTER PINCUS' SOURCES
DEEP INSIDE THE GOVERNMENT
QUESTIONED HOW THE INTELLIGENCE
WAS BEING USED, BUT HIS STORIES
WERE MOSTLY RELEGATED TO THE
BACK PAGES.
ACROSS THE MEDIA WORLD, THE
BELLICOSE BUT UNCONFIRMED CLAIMS
MADE THE BIG HEADLINES.
THE CAUTIONARY STORIES DID NOT.
AND I BELIEVE, HONESTLY,
PEOPLE DON'T HAVE A FEAR OF
IRRITATING THE WHITE HOUSE--
CERTAINLY NOT AT THE "WASHINGTON
POST."
BUT THEY DO WORRY ABOUT SORT OF
GETTING OUT AHEAD OF SOMETHING.
Moyers: ISN'T THAT SUPPOSED
TO BE SCOOP JOURNALISM?
WELL, BUT YOU COULD BE WRONG.
IT'S A TRUISM THAT INDIVIDUAL
JOURNALISTS, AND, IN FACT, THE
TOP RANK MEDIA OUTLETS THEY WORK
FOR, REALLY WANT TO BE AHEAD OF
THE CURVE, BUT NOT OUT ON A
LIMB.
AND IF YOU TOOK SERIOUSLY THE
WARNING FLAGS THAT WERE PROFUSE
BEFORE THE INVASION OF IRAQ,
THAT THE ADMINISTRATION'S STORY
WAS A BUNCH OF NONSENSE ABOUT
W.M.D.s, YOU WOULD NOT JUST BE
AHEAD OF THE CURVE A LITTLE, YOU
WOULD HAVE BEEN WAY OUT ON A
LIMB.
I DON'T THINK THERE WAS
ENOUGH SKEPTICISM BECAUSE I
THINK MOST OF US KIND OF
BELIEVED THAT SADDAM HUSSEIN WAS
BUILDING BIOLOGICAL, CHEMICAL
AND PERHAPS EVEN NUCLEAR
WEAPONS.
Moyers: ISN'T IT THE ROLE OF
THE FOURTH ESTATE, THOUGH, TO BE
CRITICAL OF GROUP THINK?
IT DEFINITELY IS AND I THINK
WE IN THE PRESS, WE'RE NOT
CRITICAL ENOUGH.
WE DIDN'T QUESTION OUR SOURCES
ENOUGH.
WE WEREN'T SMART ENOUGH, WE
WEREN'T ALERT ENOUGH, WE DIDN'T
DIG ENOUGH, AND WE SHOULDN'T
HAVE BEEN FOOLED IN THIS WAY.
Moyers: EVEN OPRAH GOT IN ON
THE ACT, FEATURING IN OCTOBER
2002 "NEW YORK" TIMES REPORTER
JUDITH MILLER.
THE U.S. INTELLIGENCE
COMMUNITY BELIEVES THAT SADDAM
HUSSEIN HAS DEADLY STOCKS OF
ANTHRAX, OF BOTULINIUM TOXIN,
WHICH IS ONE OF THE MOST
VIRULENT POISONS KNOWN TO MAN.
Moyers: LIBERAL HAWK KENNETH
POLLAK.
AND WHAT WE KNOW FOR A FACT
FROM A NUMBER OF DEFECTORS
WHO'VE COME OUT OF IRAQ OVER THE
YEARS IS THAT SADDAM HUSSEIN IS
ABSOLUTELY DETERMINED TO ACQUIRE
NUCLEAR WEAPONS AND IS BUILDING
THEM AS FAST AS HE CAN.
Moyers: AND THE RIGHT HAND
MAN TO AHMED CHALABI.
AND SO DO THE IRAQI PEOPLE
WANT THE AMERICAN PEOPLE TO
LIBERATE THEM?
ABSOLUTELY.
IN 1991 THE IRAQI PEOPLE WERE...
I HOPE IT DOESN'T OFFEND
YOU...
Moyers: WHEN ONE GUEST DARED
TO EXPRESS DOUBT, OPRAH WOULD
HAVE NONE OF IT.
I JUST DON'T KNOW WHAT TO
BELIEVE WITH THE MEDIA AND...
OH, WE'RE NOT TRYING TO
PROPAGANDA... SHOW YOU
PROPAGANDA.
WE'RE JUST SHOWING YOU WHAT IS.
I UNDERSTAND THAT, I
UNDERSTAND THAT.
OKAY.
BUT OKAY, YOU HAVE A RIGHT TO
YOUR OPINION.
Moyers: CONTRARY OPINIONS
WEREN'T VERY POPULAR IN
WASHINGTON EITHER, AS AMBITIOUS
DEMOCRATS EMBRACED THE NOW
CONVENTIONAL BUT UNCONFIRMED
WISDOM.
IN THE WAKE OF SEPTEMBER 11,
WHO AMONG US CAN SAY WITH ANY
CERTAINTY TO ANYBODY THAT THE
WEAPONS MIGHT NOT BE USED
AGAINST OUR TROOPS OR AGAINST
ALLIES IN THE REGION?
IT IS CLEAR, HOWEVER, THAT IF
LEFT UNCHECKED, SADDAM HUSSEIN
WILL CONTINUE TO INCREASE HIS
CAPACITY TO WAGE BIOLOGICAL AND
CHEMICAL WARFARE, AND WILL KEEP
TRYING TO DEVELOP NUCLEAR
WEAPONS.
Moyers: WHEN DEMOCRATS DID GO
AGAINST THE GRAIN, THEY WERE
DENOUNCED BY THE PARTISAN PRESS
AND LARGELY IGNORED BY THE
MAINSTREAM PRESS.
AND BEFORE WE PUT THIS GREAT
NATION ON THE TRACK TO WAR, I
WANT TO SEE MORE EVIDENCE-- HARD
EVIDENCE-- NOT MORE PRESIDENTIAL
RHETORIC.
I HAVE HEARD NO PERSUASIVE
EVIDENCE THAT SADDAM IS ON THE
THRESHOLD OF ACQUIRING THE
NUCLEAR WEAPONS HE HAS SOUGHT
FOR MORE THAN 20 YEARS.
AND THE ADMINISTRATION HAS
OFFERED NO PERSUASIVE EVIDENCE
THAT SADDAM WOULD TRANSFER
CHEMICAL OR BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS
OF MASS DESTRUCTION TO AL QAEDA.
TED KENNEDY GAVE A PASSIONATE
SPEECH IN 2002 RAISING ALL SORTS
OF QUESTIONS ABOUT THE WAR AND
WHAT THE AFTERMATH WOULD BE.
WAR WITH IRAQ BEFORE A
GENUINE ATTEMPT AT INSPECTION
AND DISARMAMENT, WITHOUT GENUINE
INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT, COULD
SWELL THE RANKS OF AL QAEDA WITH
SYMPATHIZERS AND TRIGGER AN
ESCALATION IN TERRORIST ACTS.
"WASHINGTON POST" GAVE THAT
SPEECH ONE SENTENCE, 36 WORDS.
I CALCULATED IN 2002 THE
"WASHINGTON POST" PROBABLY
PUBLISHED 1,000 ARTICLES AND
COLUMNS ABOUT... ABOUT IRAQ.
PROBABLY ONE MILLION WORDS, IN
EXCESS OF ONE MILLION WORDS.
AND ONE OF THE MOST FAMOUS
DEMOCRATS IN THE COUNTRY RAISED
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE WAR, THE
"WASHINGTON POST" SET ASIDE 36
WORDS.
Moyers: IT HAD NOW BECOME
UNFASHIONABLE TO DISSENT FROM
THE OFFICIAL LINE, UNFASHIONABLE
AND RISKY.
ANYONE WHO HURTS THIS COUNTRY
IN A TIME LIKE THIS, WELL, LET'S
JUST SAY YOU WILL BE
SPOTLIGHTED.
IF YOU'RE A JOURNALIST OR A
POLITICIAN AND YOU'RE SWIMMING
UPSTREAM, SO TO SPEAK, YOU'RE
GOING TO ENCOUNTER A LOT OF
PIRANHA, AND THEY ARE VORACIOUS.
THERE'S A NOTION THAT THIS IS
THE PERSON THAT WE GO AFTER THIS
WEEK.
FOX NEWS AND... AND TALK
RADIO AND THE CONSERVATIVE
BLOGGERS.
I MEAN, THEY WERE BANGING THOSE
DRUMS VERY LOUD, AND EVERYONE IN
THE PRESS COULD HEAR IT.
NOT ONLY WAS IT JUST LIBERAL
BIAS, IT WAS AN ANTI-AMERICAN
BIAS, AN UNPATRIOTIC BIAS AND
THAT THESE JOURNALISTS WERE
REALLY NOT PART OF AMERICA.
AND EVERY JOURNALIST KNEW IT.
THEY HAD AND THEY HAVE A VERY
EFFECTIVE SLAM MACHINE.
AND THE WAY IT WORKS IS, "YOU
EITHER REPORT THE NEWS THE WAY
WE WANT IT REPORTED OR WE'RE
GOING TO HANG A SIGN AROUND YOUR
NECK."
I WILL CALL THOSE WHO
PUBLICLY CRITICIZE THEIR COUNTRY
IN A TIME OF MILITARY CRISIS--
WHICH THIS IS-- BAD AMERICANS.
THERE'S A LEVEL OF VITRIOL
AND VINDICTIVENESS THAT IS VERY
SCARY TO LISTEN TO, AND YOU
THINK THE MILLIONS OF PEOPLE
LISTENING TO THEM.
THE MEDIA HAVE BECOME SORT OF
LIKE THE WHIPPING BOY BECAUSE
THEY KNOW THAT THE PRESS CAN
PROVIDE INFORMATION THAT RUNS
COUNTER TO WHAT THE GOVERNMENT
IS CLAIMING, TO WHAT THE BUSH
ADMINISTRATION IS CLAIMING.
NOW, "DONAHUE."
Moyers: ON HIS NEW MSNBC TALK
SHOW, PHIL DONAHUE DISCOVERED
JUST WHAT COULD HAPPEN WHEN YOU
STEPPED OUT OF LINE.
TONIGHT: ANTI-WAR PROTESTORS
TAKING ON THE GOVERNMENT.
IS THERE A PLACE FOR THEM IN
THIS POST-9/11 WORLD OR ARE THEY
JUST DOWNRIGHT UNPATRIOTIC?
AND I JUST FELT, YOU KNOW, WHAT
WOULD BE WRONG WITH HAVING ONE
SHOW A NIGHT, YOU KNOW, SAY,
"HOLD IT, WAIT A MINUTE.
CAN WE AFFORD THIS?
DO WE HAVE ENOUGH TROOPS?
AND WHAT ABOUT GENERAL SHINSEKI?
AND WHERE ARE ALL... YOU KNOW,
WHAT IS GUANTANAMO?
I MEAN, WHAT'S WRONG WITH THIS?"
I THOUGHT PEOPLE WHO DIDN'T LIKE
MY MESSAGE WOULD WATCH ME
BECAUSE THE... NO ONE ELSE WAS
DOING IT.
THAT'S WHY I COULDN'T GET OVER
THE UNANIMITY OF OPINION ON
CABLE.
THE DRUM WAS BEATING.
EVERYBODY WANTED TO BOMB
SOMEBODY.
AND I'M THINKING, "WAIT A
MINUTE."
SO, HERE I GO... I MEAN, FOOL
THAT I AM.
I RUSHED IN.
SCOTT RITTER IS HERE AND SO IS
AMBASSADOR...
Moyers: YOU HAD SCOTT RITTER,
FORMER WEAPONS INSPECTOR, WHO
WAS SAYING THAT IF WE INVADE, IT
WILL BE A HISTORIC BLUNDER.
YOU DIDN'T HAVE HIM ALONE.
HE HAD TO BE THERE WITH SOMEONE
ELSE WHO SUPPORTED THE WAR.
IN OTHER WORDS, YOU COULDN'T
HAVE SCOTT RITTER ALONE.
YOU COULD HAVE RICHARD PERLE
ALONE.
Moyers: YOU COULD HAVE THE
CONSERVATIVES...
YOU COULD HAVE THE SUPPORTERS
OF THE PRESIDENT ALONE, AND THEY
WOULD SAY WHY THIS WAR IS
IMPORTANT.
YOU COULDN'T HAVE A DISSENTER
ALONE.
OUR PRODUCERS WERE INSTRUCTED TO
FEATURE TWO CONSERVATIVES FOR
EVERY LIBERAL.
Moyers: YOU'RE KIDDING.
NO, THIS IS ABSOLUTELY TRUE.
Moyers: INSTRUCTED FROM
ABOVE?
YES.
I WAS COUNTED AS TWO LIBERALS,
AND SO...
Moyers: THEY'RE UNDER SELLING
YOU.
I HAD TO... I HAD TO HAVE
TWO... THERE'S JUST A TERRIBLE
FEAR.
AND I THINK THAT'S THE RIGHT
WORD.
Moyers: ERIC SORENSON, WHO
WAS THE PRESIDENT OF MSNBC, TOLD
THE "NEW YORK TIMES," "ANY
MISSTEP AND YOU CAN GET INTO
TROUBLE WITH THESE GUYS AND HAVE
THE PATRIOTISM POLICE HUNT YOU
DOWN."
YES.
WELL, HE'S THE MANAGEMENT GUY.
SO HIS PHONE WOULD RING.
NOBODY'S GOING TO CALL DONAHUE
AND TELL HIM TO SHUT UP AND
SUPPORT THE WAR.
NOBODY'S THAT FOOLISH.
IT'S A LOT MORE SUBTLE THAN
THAT.
I THINK THAT WHAT HAPPENED IN
THE MONTHS LEADING UP TO THE WAR
IS THAT THERE WAS A SORT OF
ACCEPTABLE MAINSTREAM OPINION
THAT GOT SET.
AND I THINK THAT PEOPLE WHO WERE
SEEN AS OUTSIDE THAT MAINSTREAM
WERE VIEWED AS SORT OF FRINGE,
AND THEY WERE MARGINALIZED.
YOU SAW THAT IN THE
DEMONSTRATORS...
ONE, TWO, THREE, FOUR, WE
DON'T WANT NO IRAQ WAR!
...HOW PEOPLE DEMONSTRATING
DID NOT GET MUCH PLAY.
FIVE, SIX, SEVEN, EIGHT, STOP
THE BOMBING, STOP THE HATE.
WE DON'T WANT NO IRAQ WAR;
THROW DICK CHENEY THROUGH THE
DOOR.
SO IN OCTOBER OF 2002,
100,000 PEOPLE IN WASHINGTON,
THE... ONE OF THE LARGEST, YOU
KNOW, PEACE DEMONSTRATIONS IN...
IN YEARS IN THE UNITED STATES.
AND THE PRESS JUST... YOU KNOW,
THE "WASHINGTON POST" PUT A
PHOTO ON ITS METRO PAGE.
Moyers: THE PHOTOGRAPHS RAN
WITH AN ARTICLE, BUT THE PAPER'S
OMBUDSMAN LATER CRITICIZED THE
"POST" FOR NOT GIVING THE STORY
MORE PROMINENCE.
MEANWHILE, IN THE SIX MONTHS
LEADING UP TO THE INVASION, THE
"WASHINGTON POST" WOULD
EDITORIALIZE IN FAVOR OF THE WAR
AT LEAST 27 TIMES.
WHAT GOT EVEN LESS INK THAN THE
PROTESTORS WAS THE RELEASE OF
SOMETHING CALLED THE NATIONAL
INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE.
BEFORE VOTING TO GIVE THE
PRESIDENT WAR POWERS, CONGRESS
ASKED THE ADMINISTRATION TO
DETAIL ALL THE TOP SECRET
EVIDENCE IT WAS USING TO JUSTIFY
AN INVASION.
THE PRESS GOT A DECLASSIFIED
VERSION.
MOST OF THE MEDIA GAVE IT A
CURSORY READING, BUT JONATHAN
LANDAY EXAMINED THE TEXT
CLOSELY.
I GOT MY COPY, AND I OPENED
IT UP.
THIS IS THE WHITE PAPER THAT...
AND I CAME TO THE PART THAT
TALKED ABOUT THE ALUMINUM TUBES.
NOW, IT SAID THAT THE MAJORITY
OF ANALYSTS BELIEVED THAT THOSE
TUBES WERE FOR THE NUCLEAR
WEAPONS PROGRAM.
IT TURNS OUT, THOUGH, THAT THAT
MAJORITY OF INTELLIGENCE
ANALYSTS WERE... HAD NO
BACKGROUND IN NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
Moyers: KNIGHT RIDDER WAS ON
TOP OF THE MOST IMPORTANT STORY
OF THE RUN-UP TO THE INVASION,
THE MANIPULATION OF INTELLIGENCE
TO MAKE THE CASE FOR WAR.
SO, HERE WAS YET ANOTHER
BUILDING BLOCK IN THIS CHAIN OF
BUILDING BLOCKS THAT WE HAD
COLLECTED OVER THESE MONTHS
ABOUT WHAT THEY WERE SAYING TO
THE PUBLIC, AND WHAT THE
INTELLIGENCE WAS ACTUALLY
TELLING THEM.
AND THERE WERE DIFFERENCES.
SOME OF THEM WERE... WERE
NUANCED, SOME OF THEM WERE QUITE
LARGE.
BUT IT BECAME QUITE APPARENT
THAT THEY WERE GRABBING JUST
ABOUT ANYTHING THEY COULD TO
MAKE THE CASE FOR GOING TO WAR
IN IRAQ.
Moyers: OVER A DOZEN SOURCES
TOLD KNIGHT RIDDER THAT THE
PENTAGON WAS PRESSURING ANALYSTS
TO "COOK THE INTELLIGENCE
BOOKS."
DEEP THROATS WERE TALKING, BUT
FEW IN THE PRESS WERE LISTENING.
THERE ARE PEOPLE WITHIN THE
U.S. GOVERNMENT WHO OBJECT WHEN
THEY PERCEIVE THAT THEIR
GOVERNMENT ISN'T BEING STRAIGHT
WITH THE PEOPLE.
AND WHEN THEY PERCEIVE THAT AN
ADMINISTRATION IS VEERING AWAY
FROM THE PRINCIPLES ON WHICH
THIS COUNTRY WAS BUILT, THEY
BECOME MORE READY TO TALK ABOUT
THINGS THAT PERHAPS THEY
ORDINARILY SHOULDN'T.
AYES ARE 296.
THE NAYS ARE 133.
THE JOINT RESOLUTION IS PASSED.
Moyers: IGNORING THE REPORTS
OF FLAWED INTELLIGENCE, CONGRESS
GAVE THE PRESIDENT THE GO-AHEAD
FOR USE OF FORCE.
KNIGHT RIDDER'S TEAM JUST KEPT
ON DIGGING.
BY THE END OF THE MONTH, THEIR
REPORTING HAD COME FULL CIRCLE.
SOURCES CONFIRMED THAT THE
PENTAGON WAS PREPARING FOR WAR
BASED ON INFORMATION FROM AHMED
CHALABI AND THE IRAQI NATIONAL
CONGRESS DESPITE OBJECTIONS FROM
EXPERTS INSIDE THE C.I.A.
THE ADMINISTRATION CAN
WITHSTAND THE KNIGHT RIDDER
CRITIQUE BECAUSE IT... IT WASN'T
REVERBERATING INSIDE WASHINGTON
AND THEREFORE PEOPLE WEREN'T
PICKING IT UP.
WE WERE UNDER THE RADAR MOST
OF THE TIME AT KNIGHT RIDDER.
WE WERE NOT A COMPANY THAT, I
THINK, KARL ROVE AND OTHERS
CARED DEEPLY ABOUT, EVEN THOUGH
IN TERMS OF READERS, WE'RE MUCH
BIGGER THAN THE "NEW YORK TIMES"
AND THE "WASHINGTON POST."
WE'RE LESS INFLUENTIAL; THERE'S
NO WAY AROUND THAT.
BUT THERE WAS A PERIOD WHEN
WE WERE SITTING OUT THERE AND I
HAD A LOT OF LATE NIGHT GUT
CHECKS WHERE I WAS JUST LIKE,
"ARE WE TOTALLY OFF ON SOME LOOP
HERE?
THAT WE...
YEAH.
WE... WE WOULD...
ARE WE... WE WRONG?
ARE WE GOING TO BE EMBARRASSED?
EVERYDAY WE WOULD LO... EVERY
DAY WE'D LOOK AT EACH OTHER AND
SAY, LITERALLY... ONE OF US
WOULD FIND SOMETHING OUT AND I'D
LOOK AT HIM AND SAY, "WHAT'S
GOING ON HERE?"
BUT I THINK IT'S TELLING THAT
THEY DIDN'T REALLY OPERATE BY
THAT BELTWAY GAME THE WAY THE
NETWORKS, THE CABLE CHANNELS,
"NEWSWEEK," "TIME," "NEW YORK
TIMES," "WASHINGTON POST."
THEY SEEM TO SORT OF OPERATE
OUTSIDE THAT BUBBLE.
AND LOOK AT WHAT THE BENEFITS
WERE WHEN THEY OPERATED OUTSIDE
THAT BUBBLE.
THEY ACTUALLY GOT THE STORY
RIGHT.
WHAT'S IMPORTANT IS IT'S... IT'S
PROOF POSITIVE THAT THAT STORY
WAS THERE.
AND IT COULD HAVE BEEN GOTTEN
AND SOME PEOPLE DID GET IT.
BUT THE VAST MAJORITY CHOSE TO
IGNORE IT OR... OR NOT EVEN TRY.
HOW MANY TIMES DID I GET
INVITED ON THE TALK... HOW MANY
TIMES DID YOU GET INVITED ON A
TALK SHOW?
I THINK MAYBE ONE...
YEAH, NOT THE BIG TALK SHOWS.
ACTUALLY...
NOT THE BIG SUNDAY SHOWS...
YOU KNOW WHAT?
I'LL TELL YOU WHO INVITED ME ON
A TALK... ON A TALK SHOWS:
C-SPAN.
TELEVISION, ESPECIALLY CABLE
TELEVISION HAS A SORT OF CROSS-
FIRE MENTALITY.
YOU PUT ON THE PRO-BUSH GUEST
AND THE ANTI-BUSH GUEST AND THEY
GO AT IT.
YOU PUT ON THE "LET'S GO INTO
IRAQ" AND "LET'S NOT GO INTO
IRAQ" AND THEY GO AT IT.
WELL, THAT'S WHAT THEY DO.
THEY'RE PUNDITS.
BUT THAT'S NOT A DEBATE THAT'S
PARTICULARLY WELL-SUITED TO
SHEDDING LIGHT ON WHETHER OR NOT
THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION'S CASE
FOR WAR RESTED ON SOME KIND OF
FACTUAL BASIS.
THAT'S NOT WHAT PUNDITS DO.
I MEAN, I REALLY THINK THE
REASON THE UNITED STATES HAS A
BAD REPUTATION IN THE ARAB WORLD
IS THAT WE HAVE BEEN ON THE SIDE
OF DICTATORSHIPS.
WE'VE BEEN ON THE SIDE OF VERY
CORRUPT, VERY BACKWARD
GOVERNMENTS.
Moyers: PETER BEINART BECAME
EDITOR OF THE "NEW REPUBLIC" AT
AGE 28.
DURING THE RUN-UP TO THE
INVASION HE WAS ONE OF THE
HOTTEST YOUNG PUNDITS IN TOWN, A
LIBERAL HAWK, ACCUSING OPPONENTS
OF THE WAR OF BEING
"INTELLECTUALLY INCOHERENT" AND
ECHOING THE OFFICIAL LINE THAT
HUSSEIN WOULD SOON POSSESS A
NUCLEAR WEAPON.
WE NEED A LITTLE BIT OF
LOGISTICAL SUPPORT, BUT WE DON'T
NEED THE MORAL SUPPORT OF
ANYONE, BECAUSE WE'RE ON THE
SIDE OF THE ANGELS IN THIS.
Moyers: HAD YOU BEEN TO IRAQ?
NO.
Moyers: SO WHAT MADE YOU
PRESENT YOURSELF, IF YOU DID,
AS... AS A MIDDLE EAST EXPERT?
I DON'T THINK THAT I
PRESENTED MYSELF AS A MIDDLE
EAST EXPERT, PER SE.
I WAS A POLITICAL JOURNALIST.
I WAS A... A COLUMNIST WRITING
ABOUT ALL KINDS OF THINGS.
SOMEONE IN MY... IN MY POSITION
IS NOT A MIDDLE EAST EXPERT IN
THE WAY THAT SOMEBODY WHO
STUDIES THIS AT A UNIVERSITY IS,
OR EVEN AT A THINK TANK.
BUT I CONSUMED THAT STUFF.
I WAS RELYING ON PEOPLE WHO DID
THAT KIND OF REPORTING AND
PEOPLE WHO HAD BEEN IN THE
GOVERNMENT WHO HAD... WHO HAD
ACCESS TO CLASSIFIED MATERIAL
FOR THEIR ASSESSMENT.
Moyers: AND YOU WOULD TALK TO
THEM AND THEY WOULD, IN EFFECT,
BRIEF YOU, THE BACKGROUND ON
WHAT THEY KNEW?
SOMETIMES, BUT...
Moyers: I'M TRYING TO HELP
THE AUDIENCE UNDERSTAND.
HOW DOES... YOU DESCRIBED
YOURSELF AS A POLITICAL... A
REPORTER OF POLITICAL OPINION,
OR A JOURNALIST OF POLITICAL
OPINION.
YEAH.
Moyers: HOW DO YOU GET THE
INFORMATION THAT ENABLES YOU TO
REACH THE CONCLUSION THAT YOU
DRAW AS A POLITICAL JOURNALIST?
WELL, I WAS DOING MOSTLY, FOR
A LARGE PART IT, WAS READING...
READING THE STATEMENTS AND THE
THINGS THAT PEOPLE SAID.
I WAS NOT A BEAT REPORTER.
I WAS EDITING A MAGAZINE AND
WRITING A COLUMN.
SO, I WAS NOT DOING A LOT OF
PRIMARY REPORTING.
BUT WHAT I WAS DOING WAS A LOT
OF READING OF OTHER PEOPLE'S
REPORTING AND READING OF WHAT
OFFICIALS WERE SAYING.
Moyers: IF WE JOURNALISTS GET
IT WRONG ON THE FACTS, WHAT IS
THERE TO BE RIGHT ABOUT?
WELL, I THINK THAT'S A GOOD
POINT, BUT THE ARGUMENT IN THE
FALL OF 2002 WAS NOT MOSTLY
ABOUT THE FACTS; IT WAS ABOUT A
WHOLE SERIES OF IDEAS ABOUT WHAT
WOULD HAPPEN IF WE INVADED.
Moyers: WHAT I'M TRYING TO
GET AT IS HOW DOES THE PUBLIC
SORT ALL OF THIS OUT FROM OUT
THERE BEYOND THE BELTWAY?
FAR MORE PEOPLE SAW YOU, SEE
BILL KRISTOL ON TELEVISION, THAN
WILL EVER READ THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS REPORTS OR THE KNIGHT
RIDDER REPORTERS.
ISN'T THERE AN IMBALANCE THEN,
ON WHAT THE PUBLIC IS GOING TO
PERCEIVE ABOUT A CRITICAL ISSUE
OF LIFE AND DEATH LIKE... LIKE
WAR?
I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT FOR
PEOPLE... LOOK, WOULD IT BE
BETTER IF TELEVISION WERE NOT
THE PRIMARY MEDIUM THROUGH WHICH
PEOPLE GOT THEIR NEWS?
YES.
THAT'S WHY I'M NOT... I DO
TELEVISION, BUT I'M PRIMARILY IN
THE BUSINESS OF WRITING AND
EDITING BECAUSE I BELIEVE
ULTIMATELY THAT WORDS CAN CONVEY
MORE, RICHER INFORMATION THAN
TELEVISION.
WOULDN'T WE BE A BETTER SOCIETY
IF PEOPLE GOT MOST OF THEIR NEWS
FROM PRINT RATHER THAN
TELEVISION?
YES, I THINK WE WOULD.
ONE OF THE GREAT PRESSURES
WE'RE FACING IN JOURNALISM NOW
IS IT'S A LOT CHEAPER TO HIRE
THUMB-SUCKERS AND PUNDITS AND
HAVE TALK SHOWS ON THE AIR THAN
ACTUALLY HAVE BUREAUS AND
REPORTERS.
AND IN THE AGE OF THE INTERNET
WHEN EVERYBODY'S A PUNDIT, WE'RE
STILL GOING TO NEED SOMEBODY
THERE TO GO TALK TO THE
COLONELS, TO BE ON THE GROUND IN
BAGHDAD AND STUFF, AND THAT'S
VERY EXPENSIVE.
REPORTING IS HARD.
THE SUBSTITUTE FOR REPORTING FAR
TOO OFTEN HAS BECOME, "LET'S
JUST RING UP AN EXPERT.
LET'S SEE.
THESE ARE EXPERTS ON
INTERNATIONAL ARMAMENTS.
AND I'LL JUST GO DOWN THE LIST
HERE AND CHECK RICHARD PERLE."
ONCE IT BEGINS TO LOOK AS
THOUGH HE IS RELINQUISHING HIS
GRIP ON POWER, I THINK HE'S
TOAST.
THE CHOICE IS DISARMING HIM
BY WAR OR LETTING HIM HAVE HIS
WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION.
THIS IS JOURNALISM ON THE
CHEAP IF IT'S JOURNALISM AT ALL.
JUST PICK UP THE PHONE, CALL AN
EXPERT, BRING AN EXPERT INTO THE
STUDIO.
EASY, NOT TIME CONSUMING,
DOESN'T TAKE RESOURCES.
AND IF YOU... IF YOU'RE LUCKY
AND GOOD WITH YOUR LIST OF
PEOPLE, YOU GET AN ARTICULATE
PERSON WHO WILL KIND OF SPARK UP
THE BROADCAST.
THE PEOPLE AT KNIGHT RIDDER
WERE CALLING THE COLONELS AND
THE LIEUTENANTS AND THE PEOPLE
IN THE C.I.A. AND FINDING OUT,
YOU KNOW, THAT INTELLIGENCE IS
NOT VERY GOOD.
WE SHOULD'VE ALL BEEN DOING
THAT.
Moyers: HOW DO YOU EXPLAIN
THAT THE FURTHER YOU GET AWAY
FROM OFFICIAL WASHINGTON, THE
CLOSER YOU GET TO REALITY?
THAT'S ONE OF THE HAZARDS IN
THIS BUSINESS IS WHEN YOU RELY
ON TOP LEVEL SOURCES TOO MUCH,
YOU CAN LOSE OUT ON GETTING THE
REAL INFORMATION.
THE PRESIDENT'S TOP NATIONAL
SECURITY ADVISORS FANNED OUT ON
THE TALK SHOWS WITH A
COORDINATED MESSAGE.
THE TEST HERE IS NOT WHETHER
THEY CAN FIND SOMETHING.
THE TEST IS WHETHER OR NOT IRAQ
IS GOING TO COOPERATE.
THIS IS ABOUT THE DISARMAMENT
OF IRAQ, NOT ABOUT WEAPONS
INSPECTORS HUNTING AND PECKING
ALL OVER THE COUNTRY.
TIME IS RUNNING OUT AND WE
JUST CAN'T KEEP HUNTING AND
PECKING AND LOOKING AND...
THE PEOPLE AT THE TOP
GENERALLY ARE POLITICAL RATHER
THAN PROFESSIONAL.
AND THEIR FIRST LOYALTY IS TO A
POLITICAL PARTY OR TO A PERSON,
NOT TO A BUREAUCRACY, NOT TO A
JOB.
AND SO, WHAT YOU GET FROM THEM
IS SPIN.
I... LOOK, I'M A BLUE-COLLAR
GUY FROM BUFFALO.
I KNOW WHO MY SOURCES ARE.
I WORK THEM VERY HARD.
IT'S THE MID-LEVEL PEOPLE THAT
TELL YOU THE TRUTH.
NOW...
Moyers: THEY'RE THE ONES WHO
KNOW THE STORY?
WELL, THEY'RE WORKING ON THE
PROBLEM.
AND THEY UNDERSTAND THE DETAIL
MUCH BETTER THAN A LOT OF THE
SO-CALLED POLICY MAKERS AND...
AND POLITICAL OFFICIALS.
Moyers: BUT THEY DON'T GET ON
THE SUNDAY TALK SHOWS.
NO.
YOU... I MEAN, THEY DON'T WANT
TO BE, TRUST ME.
I MEAN, THEY CAN LOSE THEIR
JOBS, AND THEY KNOW IT.
BUT THEY'RE... THEY CAN PROVIDE
INFORMATION, WHICH CAN HELP IN
ME CHALLENGING OR TRYING TO DRAW
OUT, SOMETIMES, THEIR BOSSES AND
OTHER PUBLIC OFFICIALS.
Moyers: WHAT DO YOU MAKE OF
THE FACT THAT OF THE 414 IRAQ
STORIES BROADCAST ON NBC, ABC
AND CBS NIGHTLY NEWS FROM
SEPTEMBER 2002 UNTIL FEBRUARY
2003, ALMOST ALL THE STORIES
COULD BE TRACED BACK TO SOURCES
FROM THE WHITE HOUSE, THE
PENTAGON, AND THE STATE
DEPARTMENT?
IT'S IMPORTANT THAT YOU HAVE
A... AN OPPOSITION PARTY.
THAT'S OUR SYSTEM OF GOVERNMENT.
Moyers: SO, IT'S NOT NEWS
UNLESS THERE'S SOMEBODY...
NO, NO, NO.
I DIDN'T SAY THAT.
BUT IT'S IMPORTANT TO HAVE AN
OPPOSITION PARTY, YOUR
OPPOSIT... OPPOSING VIEWS.
MORE AND MORE IN... THE MEDIA
BECOME, I THINK, COMMON CARRIERS
OF ADMINISTRATION STATEMENTS,
AND CRITICS OF THE
ADMINISTRATION.
AND WE'VE SORT OF GIVEN UP BEING
INDEPENDENT ON OUR OWN.
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, THE
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.
WE USED TO DO AT THE "POST"
SOMETHING CALLED TRUTH SQUADING.
PRESIDENT WOULD MAKE A SPEECH...
WE USED TO DO IT WITH RONALD
REAGAN THE FIRST FIVE OR SIX
MONTHS BECAUSE HE WOULD MAKE SO
MANY FACTUAL ERRORS,
PARTICULARLY IN HIS PRESS
CONFERENCE.
FROM $10,000 TO $60,000 A
YEAR...
AND AFTER TWO OR THREE WEEKS
OF IT, THE PUBLIC AT LARGE,
WOULD SAY, "WHY DON'T YOU LEAVE
THE MAN ALONE?
HE'S TRYING TO BE HONEST.
HE MAKES MISTAKES.
SO WHAT?"
AND WE STOPPED DOING IT.
Moyers: YOU STOPPED BEING THE
TRUTH SQUAD?
WE STOPPED TRUTH SQUADING
EVERY SORT OF PRESS CONFERENCE,
OR TRUTH SQUADING.
AND WE LEFT IT THEN TO THE
DEMOCRATS.
IN OTHER WORDS, IT'S UP TO THE
DEMOCRATS TO CATCH PEOPLE, NOT
US.
Moyers: SO, IF THE DEMOCRATS
CHALLENGED A STATEMENT FROM THE
PRESIDENT, YOU COULD QUOTE BOTH
SIDES.
WE THEN QUOTE BOTH SIDES,
YEAH.
Moyers: NOW, THAT'S CALLED
OBJECTIVITY BY MANY STANDARDS,
ISN'T IT?
WELL, THAT'S OBJECTIVITY IF
YOU THINK THERE ARE ONLY TWO
SIDES AND IF YOU'RE NOT
INTERESTED IN THE FACTS.
AND THE FACTS ARE SEPARATE FROM,
YOU KNOW, WHAT ONE SIDE SAYS
ABOUT THE OTHER.
Moyers: BY LATE NOVEMBER
2002, THE PRESS HAD YET ANOTHER
CHANCE TO GET THE FACTS RIGHT.
FACING INTENSE INTERNATIONAL
PRESSURE, THE WHITE HOUSE AGREED
TO HOLD OFF MILITARY ACTION
UNTIL SADDAM HUSSEIN PERMITTED A
TEAM OF U.N. INSPECTORS TO
RETURN TO IRAQ AND TAKE A CLOSER
LOOK.
THE FIRST INSPECTIONS BEGAN ON
NOVEMBER 27.
CHARLES HANLEY, A PRIZE WINNING
REPORTER FOR THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS WITH MORE THAN 30 YEARS
EXPERIENCE REPORTING ON WEAPONS
ISSUES, WENT ALONG TO COVER
THEIR WORK.
WHAT WE DID WAS GO OUT EVERY
DAY WITH THE INSPECTORS.
THESE GUYS WOULD ROAR OUT ON
THESE MOTORCADES AT VERY HIGH
SPEED AND ROAR THROUGH TOWNS AND
DO SUDDEN U-TURNS AND... AND
DRIVE OVER LAND AND DO ALL OF
THESE THINGS TO CONFUSE THE
IRAQIS ABOUT WHERE THEY WERE
GOING SO THAT THERE WOULDN'T BE
A CALL AHEAD TELLING...TELLING
THEM TO PUT AWAY ALL THE BAD
STUFF.
THE INSPECTORS THEN WOULD ISSUE
A DAILY REPORT.
AND AS IT TURNED OUT, OF COURSE,
INSPECTION AFTER INSPECTION, IT
TURNED OUT TO BE CLEAN.
THEY HAD NOTHING TO REPORT, NO
VIOLATIONS TO REPORT.
Moyers: IN JANUARY OF ¡03
HANLEY WROTE ABOUT THE
SUSPICIOUS SITES THAT THE U.S.
AND BRITISH GOVERNMENTS HAD
EARLIER IDENTIFIED AS MAJOR
CONCERNS.
"NO SMOKING GUNS IN... ALMOST
400 INSPECTIONS," HE REPORTED.
IT OUGHT TO HAVE CAST SERIOUS
DOUBT ON THE WHITE HOUSE'S
ENTIRE EVALUATION OF THE IRAQI
THREAT.
BUT REPORTING LIKE THIS WAS
OVERSHADOWED BY THE DRUMBEAT
FROM WASHINGTON, WHICH IS WHY,
HANLEY SAYS, SOMETIMES HIS
EDITORS BALKED WHEN HE WROTE
THAT THE WHITE HOUSE LACKED FIRM
EVIDENCE ON W.M.D.s.
AND THAT WOULD BE STRICKEN
FROM MY COPY BECAUSE IT WOULD
STRIKE SOME EDITORS AS A... AS
CONTENTIOUS, AS SORT OF AN
ATTACK OR SOME SORT OF
ALLEGATION RATHER THAN A FACT,
YOU KNOW, AND "WE DON'T WANT OUR
REPORTERS ALLEGING THINGS.
WE, YOU KNOW, WE JUST REPORT THE
FACTS."
WELL, IT WAS A FACT.
IT WAS A VERY IMPORTANT FACT
THAT SEEMED TO BE LOST ON AN
AWFUL LOT OF JOURNALISTS,
UNFORTUNATELY.
Moyers: SIX WEEKS BEFORE THE
INVASION, WITH THE FACTS STILL
IN SHORT SUPPLY, THE AMERICAN
SECRETARY OF STATE WENT BEFORE
THE UNITED NATIONS.
I CANNOT TELL YOU EVERYTHING
THAT WE KNOW.
BUT WHAT I CAN SHARE WITH YOU,
WHEN COMBINED WITH WHAT ALL OF
US HAVE LEARNED OVER THE YEARS,
IS DEEPLY TROUBLING.
ONE MAJOR PROBLEM WAS THAT
SECRETARY POWELL BARELY
ACKNOWLEDGED THAT THERE WERE
INSPECTIONS GOING ON.
IT GOT TO RIDICULOUS POINTS,
SUCH AS HIS COMPLAINING ABOUT
THE FACT THAT THEY'D PUT A ROOF
OVER THIS OPEN AIR SHED WHERE
THEY WERE TESTING MISSILES.
THIS PHOTOGRAPH WAS TAKEN IN
APRIL OF 2002.
SINCE THEN, THE TEST STAND HAS
BEEN FINISHED AND A ROOF HAS
BEEN PUT OVER IT SO IT WILL BE
HARDER FOR SATELLITES TO SEE
WHAT'S GOING ON UNDERNEATH THE
TEST STAND.
WHAT HE NEGLECTED TO MENTION
WAS THAT THE INSPECTORS WERE
UNDERNEATH, WATCHING WHAT WAS
GOING ON.
A SINGLE DROP OF V. X. ON THE
SKIN WILL KILL IN MINUTES.
FOUR TONS.
HE DIDN'T POINT OUT THAT MOST
OF THAT HAD ALREADY BEEN
DESTROYED.
AND ON POINT AFTER POINT, HE
FAILED TO POINT OUT THAT THESE
FACILITIES ABOUT WHICH HE WAS
RAISING SUCH ALARM WERE UNDER
REPEATED INSPECTIONS BY... BY
GOOD... EXPERT PEOPLE WITH VERY
GOOD EQUIPMENT, AND WHO WERE
LEAVING BEHIND CAMERAS AND OTHER
MONITORING EQUIPMENT TO KEEP
US... A CONTINUING EYE ON IT.
LEAVING SADDAM HUSSEIN IN
POSSESSION OF WEAPONS OF MASS
DESTRUCTION FOR A FEW MORE
MONTHS OR YEARS IS NOT AN
OPTION, NOT IN A POST-SEPTEMBER
11 WORLD.
THE HOLES IN THE...HIS
PRESENTATION BECAME IMMEDIATE
WITHIN DAYS IF NOT HOURS.
BUT WHAT I WANT TO BRING TO
YOUR ATTENTION TODAY IS THE
POTENTIALLY MUCH MORE SINISTER
NEXUS BETWEEN IRAQ AND THE AL
QAEDA TERRORIST NETWORK, A NEXUS
THAT COMBINES CLASSIC TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS AND MODERN METHODS
OF MURDER.
ONE OF THE FIRST BIG
EMBARRASSMENTS WAS POWELL HAD
TALKED ABOUT THIS BRITISH
INTELLIGENCE REPORT.
I WOULD CALL MY COLLEAGUES'
ATTENTION TO THE FINE PAPER THAT
UNITED KINGDOM DISTRIBUTED
YESTERDAY, WHICH DESCRIBES IN
EXQUISITE DETAIL IRAQI DECEPTION
ACTIVITIES.
Moyers: SUPPOSEDLY THAT
"EXQUISITE DETAIL" FROM BRITISH
INTELLIGENCE CAME FROM A TOP-
SECRET DOSSIER.
LITERALLY WITHIN A DAY OR TWO
IT WAS... IT WAS PROVEN IN
THE... IN THE BRITISH PRESS THAT
THAT HAD SIMPLY BEEN DOWNLOADED
OFF THE INTERNET AND WAS
PLAGIARIZED.
AND IT ACTUALLY CONTAINS THE
TYPOS THAT WERE IN THE ORIGINAL.
THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT
DOSSIER IS SUPPOSED TO BE ABOUT
IRAQI DECEPTION AND CONCEALMENT.
IT SAYS IT DRAWS UPON A NUMBER
OF SOURCES, INCLUDING
INTELLIGENCE MATERIAL.
WELL, ACTUALLY, WHAT IT LARGELY
DRAWS ON IS A THESIS WRITTEN BY
A CALIFORNIAN POST-GRADUATE
STUDENT.
THAT WAS JUST THE FIRST OF
MANY EMBARRASSMENTS THAT WERE TO
COME.
BUT WITHIN DAYS, THE BRITISH
PRESS WAS GOING CRAZY OVER
THIS... OVER THIS REVELATION.
AS FOR THE STUDENT HIMSELF,
HE'S ACCUSED THE GOVERNMENT OF
PLAGIARISM.
IF THE GOVERNMENT IS REDUCED
TO TRAWLING ACADEMIC JOURNALS,
THEN HOW GOOD IS THE REST OF ITS
CASE FOR WAR AGAINST IRAQ?
Moyers: FEW PROMINENT
AMERICAN BROADCASTERS WOULD ASK
SUCH POINTED QUESTIONS:
THE SECRETARY OF STATE COLIN
POWELL HAS MADE THE CASE AGAINST
IRAQ.
SECRETARY OF STATE COLIN
POWELL HAS GIVEN A LOT OF
IMPORTANT SPEECHES IN HIS
LIFETIME TO A LOT OF LARGE
AUDIENCES, BUT NO SPEECH WAS
MORE IMPORTANT THAN THE ONE HE
GAVE TODAY.
IN THE UNITED NATION SECURITY
COUNCIL THIS MORNING, THE
SECRETARY OF STATE COLIN POWELL
TOOK ALMOST AN HOUR AND A HALF
TO MAKE THE BUSH
ADMINISTRATION'S CASE AGAINST
SADDAM HUSSEIN.
MAKING THE CASE FOR WAR:
SECRETARY POWELL SHOWS THE WORLD
WHAT HE CALLS "UNDENIABLE
PROOF."
COLIN POWELL WAS TRUSTED--
IS TRUSTED, I'D PUT IT, IN A
SENSE.
HE, UNLIKE MANY OF THE PEOPLE
WHO MADE THE DECISIONS TO GO TO
WAR, COLIN POWELL HAS SEEN WAR.
HE KNOWS WHAT A GREEN JUNGLE
HELL VIETNAM WAS.
HE KNOWS WHAT THE BATTLEFIELD
LOOKS LIKE.
AND WHEN COLIN POWELL SAYS TO
YOU, "I, COLIN POWELL, AM
PUTTING MY PERSONAL STAMP ON
THIS INFORMATION.
IT'S MY NAME, MY FACE, AND I'M
PUTTING IT OUT THERE," THAT DID
MAKE A DIFFERENCE.
Moyers: AND YOU WERE
IMPRESSED.
I WAS IMPRESSED.
AND WHO WOULDN'T BE?
AND YOU LOOK AT THE RESPONSE
FROM-- FORGET ABOUT THE RIGHT-
WING MEDIA-- FROM THE SO-CALLED
LIBERAL PRESS THE NEXT MORNING.
YOU PICK UP THE "WASHINGTON
POST," ON THE OP-ED PAGE,
THERE'S JIM HOAGLAND SAYING,
"OBVIOUSLY, FROM WHAT POWELL
SAID, THERE ARE WEAPONS OF MASS
DESTRUCTION IN IRAQ."
YOU GO A FEW INCHES AWAY TO
RICHARD COHEN, AN AVOWED
LIBERAL, HE SAYS, "OBVIOUSLY
THERE ARE WEAPONS OF MASS
DESTRUCTION."
I MEAN, IT'S A FAIR PARAPHRASE
TO SAY THESE PUNDITS AND MANY
OTHERS WERE ASSERTING "IF YOU
DON'T THINK THERE ARE W.M.D.s IN
IRAQ, YOU ARE AN IDIOT."
Moyers: ACROSS THE COUNTRY
EDITORIAL WRITERS BOUGHT WHAT
POWELL WAS SELLING.
THESE WERE SUPPOSED TO BE THE
MOST DISCERNING, SOPHISTICATED
JOURNALISTS IN THE COUNTRY
WRITING THIS STUFF, AND THEY
WERE TOTALLY BAMBOOZLED.
AND SURE ENOUGH, IN THE
NEWSPAPERS, IF YOU LOOKED VERY
HARD INSIDE IN THE NEXT FEW DAYS
IN THE COVERAGE, YOU COULD FIND
REALLY SERIOUS QUESTIONS THAT
WERE RAISED ABOUT THIS.
BUT THEY WERE VERY MUCH PUSHED
ASIDE.
Moyers: THIS GETS US RIGHT TO
THE HEART OF THE DEBATE THAT'S
GOING ON NOW IN OUR CRAFT.
WE LEAN HEAVILY IN REPORTING ON
WHAT THEY SAY.
THAT'S RIGHT.
Moyers: "WE WANT NO WIDER
WAR."
"I'M NOT A CROOK."
"MUSHROOM CLOUD."
"WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION."
WE REALLY GIVE HEAVY WEIGHT TO
WHAT PUBLIC OFFICIALS SAY.
WELL, THAT'S TRUE, AND WE
NEED TO ADDRESS THAT.
IN THE END IT WAS, "LOOK, THE
PRESIDENT HIMSELF SAYS THESE
THINGS ARE SO.
HE STANDS BEFORE THE CONGRESS
WITH THE QUESTION OF WAR AND
PEACE HANGING IN THE BALANCE AND
SAYS THESE THINGS."
AND THERE WAS A FEELING, NOT
JUST WITH MYSELF; GIVEN ALL
THAT, WHO AM I TO SAY, "YOU KNOW
WHAT, I THINK IT'S ALL A
MACHIAVELLIAN SCHEME TO TAKE US
INTO IRAQ."
BIG NEWS TODAY IN THE CABLE
WORLD, ELLEN: PHIL DONAHUE
CANCELLED BY THAT OTHER NETWORK.
Moyers: 22 DAYS BEFORE THE
INVASION, YOUR SHOW WAS
CANCELED.
IT SHOULD BE SAID THAT WE DID
FAIRLY WELL IN THE RATINGS.
WE DID NOT BURN THE TOWN DOWN.
NOBODY ON MSNBC DID.
BUT WE WERE CERTAINLY AS GOOD AS
ANYBODY ELSE ON THE NETWORK.
AND OFTEN, OFTEN WE LED THE
NETWORK.
Moyers: IN DUMPING DONAHUE,
NBC CITED RATINGS.
BUT A BLOGGER GOT HIS HANDS ON
AN INTERNAL MEMO AND THE PRESS
PICKED IT UP.
NOW THAT MEMO SAID, "DONOHUE
PRESENTS A DIFFICULT PUBLIC FACE
FOR NBC IN A TIME OF WAR.
AT THE SAME TIME, OUR
COMPETITORS ARE WAVING THE FLAG
AT EVERY OPPORTUNITY."
DID YOU KNOW ABOUT THAT MEMO AT
THE TIME?
NO, NO.
I DIDN'T KNOW ABOUT THAT TILL I
READ ABOUT IT IN THE "NEW YORK
TIMES."
Moyers: WHAT DID YOU THINK...
WHAT... WHAT DOES THAT SAY TO
YOU?
THAT DISSENT IS UNPATRIOTIC?
WELL, NOT ONLY UNPATRIOTIC,
BUT IT'S NOT GOOD FOR BUSINESS.
TONIGHT, THE CASE FOR WAR.
SHOWDOWN IRAQ, WITH WOLF
BLITZER.
I THINK THESE EXECUTIVES WERE
TERRIFIED OF BEING CALLED SOFT
ON TERRORISM.
THEY ABSOLUTELY KNEW THAT THE
WINDS WERE BLOWING AT HURRICANE
FORCE POLITICALLY AND SOCIALLY
IN THE UNITED STATES.
AND RATHER THAN STAND UP FOR
JOURNALISM, THEY JUST BLEW WITH
THE WIND.
AND DAN RATHER AND OTHERS WHO
SAY, "YEAH, YOU KNOW, I WAS
CARRIED AWAY BACK THEN."
WELL, SURE.
THAT'S WHEN IT MATTERS.
WHEN IT MATTERS MOST IS WHEN YOU
CAN MAKE A DIFFERENCE AS A
JOURNALIST.
FEAR IS IN EVERY NEWSROOM IN
THE COUNTRY.
AND FEAR OF WHAT?
WELL, IT'S THE FEAR IF... IT'S A
COMBINATION OF IF YOU DON'T GO
ALONG TO GET ALONG, YOU'RE GOING
TO GET THE REPUTATION OF BEING A
TROUBLEMAKER.
THERE'S ALSO THE FEAR THAT, YOU
KNOW, PARTICULARLY IN...IN
NETWORKS, THEY'VE BECOME HUGE,
INTERNATIONAL CONGLOMERATES.
THEY HAVE BIG NEEDS, LEGISLATIVE
NEEDS, REGULATORY NEEDS IN
WASHINGTON.
NOBODY HAS TO SEND YOU A MEMO TO
TELL YOU THAT THAT'S THE CASE.
YOU KNOW, AND THAT PUTS A SEED
IN YOUR MIND OF, WELL, IF YOU
STICK YOUR NECK OUT, IF YOU TAKE
THE RISK OF GOING AGAINST THE
GRAIN WITH YOUR REPORTING, IS
ANYBODY GOING TO BACK YOU UP?
THE MEDIA JUST CONTINUED ON
THIS PATH OF REPORTING, "WELL,
THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION ALLEGES
THAT THERE ARE W.M.D," AND NEVER
REALLY STOPPED AND SAID, "IT
DOESN'T LOOK LIKE THERE ARE.
THERE'S NO EVIDENCE."
THAT SHOULD HAVE BEEN THE SECOND
SENTENCE IN ANY STORY ABOUT THE
ALLEGATIONS OF W.M.D.
THE SECOND SENTENCE SHOULD HAVE
BEEN, "BUT THEY DID NOT PRESENT
ANY EVIDENCE TO BACK THIS UP."
YOU KNOW, WE'RE SENDING YOUNG
MEN AND WOMEN, AND NOWADAYS NOT
SO YOUNG MEN AND WOMEN, TO RISK
THEIR LIVES.
AND EVERYONE WANTS TO BE BEHIND
THEM AND EVERYONE SHOULD BE
BEHIND THEM.
THE QUESTION FOR US IN
JOURNALISM IS, ARE WE REALLY
BEHIND THEM WHEN WE FAIL TO DO
OUR JOBS?
IS THAT REALLY THE KIND OF
SUPPORT THAT THEY DESERVE?
OR ARE WE REALLY, IN THE LONG
RUN, SERVING THEM BETTER BY
ASKING THESE HARD QUESTIONS
ABOUT WHAT WE'VE ASKED THEM TO
DO?
GOOD MORNING.
SHOCK AND AWE.
OPERATION IRAQI FREEDOM
REPORTS OF SECRET SURRENDER
TALKS AS U.S. BOMBS HIT
BAGHDAD.
THIS CBS NEWS SPECIAL REPORT
IS PART OF OUR CONTINUING
COVERAGE OF AMERICA AT WAR.
Moyers: FOUR YEARS AFTER
SHOCK AND AWE, THE PRESS HAS YET
TO COME TO TERMS WITH ITS ROLE
IN ENABLING THE BUSH
ADMINISTRATION TO GO TO WAR ON
FALSE PRETENSES.
PETER BEINERT IS ALMOST ALONE IN
ADMITTING HE WAS MISTAKEN.
WHERE I THINK I WAS
TRAGICALLY WRONG WAS NOT TO SEE
IN FEBRUARY, MARCH 2003, AFTER
WE GOT THE INSPECTORS BACK IN ON
THE GROUND AND WE BEGAN TO LEARN
MUCH MORE ABOUT WHAT HAD BEEN
GOING ON IN IRAQ THAN WE HAD
KNOWN IN 2002, WHEN WE HAD NO
ONE ON THE GROUND, THAT THAT
ASSUMPTION WAS BEING PROVEN
WRONG.
Moyers: YOU SAY TRAGICALLY
BECAUSE I THINK THE WAR HAS
BEEN A TRAGIC DISASTER.
I MEAN, THE AMERICANS KILLED,
THE IRAQIS KILLED.
IT'S TRUE, LIFE UNDER SADDAM WAS
HELL, BUT CAN ONE REALLY SAY
THAT LIFE FOR IRAQIS IS BETTER
TODAY?
Moyers: WE WANTED TO TALK TO
SOME OTHERS IN THE MEDIA ABOUT
THEIR ROLE IN THE RUN UP TO THE
WAR.
JUDITH MILLER, WHO LEFT THE
"TIMES" AFTER BECOMING EMBROILED
IN A WHITE HOUSE LEAK SCANDAL
DECLINED OUR REQUEST ON LEGAL
GROUNDS.
THE "TIMES'" LIBERAL HAWK THOMAS
FRIEDMAN ALSO SAID NO.
SO DID BILL SAFIRE, WHO HAD
PREDICTED IRAQ WOULD NOW BE
LEADING THE ARAB WORLD TO
DEMOCRACY.
PRESIDENT BUSH RECENTLY AWARDED
HIM THE MEDAL OF FREEDOM.
THE "WASHINGTON POST'S" CHARLES
KRAUTHAMMER ALSO TURNED US DOWN.
SO DID ROGER AILES, THE MAN IN
CHARGE OF FOX NEWS.
HE DECLINED BECAUSE, AN
ASSISTANT TOLD US, HE'S WRITING
A BOOK ON HOW FOX HAS CHANGED
THE FACE OF AMERICAN
BROADCASTING AND DOESN'T WANT TO
SCOOP HIMSELF.
WILLIAM KRISTOL LED THE MARCH TO
BAGHDAD BEHIND A BATTERY OF
WASHINGTON MICROPHONES.
HE HAS NOT RESPONDED TO ANY OF
OUR REQUESTS FOR AN INTERVIEW
BUT HE STILL SHOWS UP ON TV AS
AN EXPERT, MOST OFTEN ON FOX
NEWS.
AND HE'S GOT TO BEGIN TO SHOW
PROGRESS IN THREE, FOUR, FIVE
MONTHS ONCE THE U.S. TROOPS GET
IN.
BEING A PRO-WAR PUNDIT MEANS
NEVER HAVING TO SAY YOU'RE
SORRY.
I MEAN, THESE WERE PEOPLE WHO
WERE LAYING OUT THE BLUEPRINT
FOR THE WAR ABOUT HOW IT WAS
GOING TO UNFOLD.
AND, IT TURNS OUT, COULDN'T HAVE
BEEN MORE WRONG EVERY WHICH WAY.
YOU HAVE A PRESIDENT...
AND IT'S ASTONISHING TO SEE
THEM STILL ON TV INVITED ON AS
EXPERTS IN THE REGION.
Moyers: IT'S TRUE, SO MANY OF
THE ADVOCATES AND APOLOGISTS FOR
THE WAR ARE STILL FLOURISHING IN
THE MEDIA.
BILL KRISTOL AND PETER BEINART,
FOR EXAMPLE, ARE NOW REGULAR
CONTRIBUTORS TO "TIME" MAGAZINE,
WHICH HAS BEEN LAYING OFF DOZENS
OF REPORTERS.
AND REMEMBER THIS BRILLIANT
LINE?
WE CANNOT WAIT FOR THE FINAL
PROOF-- THE SMOKING GUN-- THAT
COULD COME IN THE FORM OF A
MUSHROOM CLOUD.
Moyers: THE MAN WHO CAME UP
WITH IT WAS MICHAEL GERSON,
PRESIDENT BUSH'S TOP
SPEECHWRITER.
HE HAS LEFT THE WHITE HOUSE AND
BEEN HIRED BY THE "WASHINGTON
POST" AS A COLUMNIST.
( GUNFIRE )
( SIRENS )
THE AMERICAN NUMBER OF TROOPS
KILLED IN IRAQ NOW EXCEEDS THE
NUMBER OF VICTIMS ON 9/11.
WE HAVE BEEN FIGHTING THERE
LONGER THAN IT TOOK US TO DEFEAT
THE NAZIS IN WORLD WAR II.
THE COSTS OF THE WAR ARE
RECKONED AT $1 TRILLION AND
COUNTING.
THE NUMBER OF IRAQIS KILLED--
OVER 35,000 LAST YEAR ALONE-- IS
HARD TO PIN DOWN.
THE COUNTRY IS IN CHAOS.
THAT'S OUR REPORT.
YOU CAN GO TO OUR WEB SITE AT
pbs.org FOR AN INTERACTIVE MEDIA
TIMELINE TRACKING THE COVERAGE
LEADING UP TO THE INVASION.